










































 

<BillNo> <Sponsor> 
 

HOUSE BILL 1215 

By Sexton  

 

 

HB1215 
002622 

- 1 - 

 
AN ACT to amend Tennessee Code Annotated, Title 4; 

Title 56; Title 68 and Title 71, relative to managed 
care organizations. 

 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE STATE OF TENNESSEE: 

 SECTION 1.  Tennessee Code Annotated, Title 71, Chapter 5, Part 1, is amended by 

adding the following as a new section: 

 (a)  A managed care organization (MCO) that contracts with the bureau of 

TennCare to provide medical assistance pursuant to this part shall not provide 

reimbursement or coverage for a medical procedure if the performance or administration 

of the procedure is for the purpose of: 

(1)  Enabling a person to identify with, or live as, a purported identity 

inconsistent with the person's sex; or  

(2)  Treating purported discomfort or distress from a discordance between 

a person's sex and asserted identity. 

 (b)  The prohibition in subsection (a) applies to an MCO's coverage or 

reimbursement for medical expenses through: 

(1)  The bureau of TennCare; 

(2)  Any private health insurance program regulated by this state; 

(3)  Any state or local insurance program; and 

(4)  Any other program for insurance or medical assistance regulated or 

administered by another state.  



 

 

 

 - 2 - 002622 

 

 (c)  Within thirty (30) days of the effective date of this act, the bureau of 

TennCare shall appropriately revise or amend the contract between a managed care 

organization (MCO) and the bureau of TennCare to comply with subsection (a). 

 (d)  An MCO that is in violation of this section and is contracting with the bureau 

of TennCare to provide medical assistance pursuant to this part on the effective date of 

this act shall come into compliance with this section no later than ninety (90) days after 

the effective date of this act.  If an MCO contracting with the bureau of TennCare to 

provide medical assistance pursuant to this part violates this section or fails to remedy a 

violation within ninety (90) days after the effective date of this act, then the MCO is no 

longer eligible to provide medical assistance pursuant to this part. 

 (e)  As used in this section: 

 (1)  "Hormone" means an androgen or estrogen; 

(2)  "Managed care organization" or "MCO" means a health maintenance 

organization, behavioral health organization, or managed health insurance issuer 

that participates in the TennCare program;  

(3)  "Medical procedure" means: 

(A)  Surgically removing, modifying, altering, or entering into 

tissues, cavities, or organs of a human being; or 

(B)  Prescribing, administering, or dispensing any puberty blocker 

or hormone to a human being; 

(4)  "Puberty blocker" means a drug or device that suppresses the 

production of hormones in a minor's body to stop, delay, or suppress pubertal 

development; and 



 

 

 

 - 3 - 002622 

 

(5)  "Sex" means a person's immutable characteristics of the reproductive 

system that define the individual as male or female, as determined by anatomy 

and genetics existing at the time of birth. 

 SECTION 2.  This act takes effect upon becoming a law, the public welfare requiring it. 


