


 
88R425 JG-F


 


 

		By: Perry
S.B. No. 162




 


 



 		
			

A BILL TO BE ENTITLED




 
			

AN ACT




 
			
relating to the required inclusion of a person's sex on a birth 



 
			
certificate and prohibited change of sex on the birth certificate 



 
			
of certain minors.



 
			
       BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF TEXAS:



 
			
       SECTION 1.  Section 192.002, Health and Safety Code, is 



 
			
amended by adding Subsection (c-1) to read as follows:



 
			
       (c-1)  The form must include a space for recording the 



 
			
biological sex of a child as either male or female.



 
			
       SECTION 2.  Section 192.003, Health and Safety Code, is 



 
			
amended by adding Subsections (f) and (g) to read as follows:



 
			
       (f)  Subject to Subsection (g), a person required to file a 



 
			
birth certificate under this section shall ensure the biological 



 
			
sex of a child, as determined by the sex organs, chromosomes, or 



 
			
endogenous profile of the child, is listed in the appropriate space 



 
			
on the child's birth certificate. A person required to report a 



 
			
birth under this section shall report the child's biological sex to 



 
			
the local registrar, and the local registrar shall list the 



 
			
biological sex in the appropriate space on the birth certificate.



 
			
       (g)  A person is not required to list on the birth 



 
			
certificate or report to the local registrar the biological sex of a 



 
			
child whose biological sex is not determined at birth because the 



 
			
child, as determined by a physician, has atypical or ambiguous sex 



 
			
organs, chromosomes, or endogenous profile for either male or 



 
			
female.  The birth certificate may be amended under Section 192.011 



 
			
at any time after the child's sex is determined to complete the 



 
			
information on the certificate by including the child's determined 



 
			
sex.



 
			
       SECTION 3.  Section 192.011, Health and Safety Code, is 



 
			
amended by amending Subsection (b) and adding Subsection (d) to 



 
			
read as follows:



 
			
       (b)  Except as provided by Subsection (d), on [On] the 



 
			
request of the person or the person's legal representative, the 



 
			
state registrar, local registrar, or other person who issues birth 



 
			
certificates shall issue a birth certificate that incorporates the 



 
			
completed or corrected information instead of issuing a copy of the 



 
			
original or supplementary certificate with an amending certificate 



 
			
attached.



 
			
       (d)  The state registrar, local registrar, or other person 



 
			
who issues a birth certificate under this section may not issue, and 



 
			
a court may not order the issuance of, a birth certificate that 



 
			
incorporates the completed or corrected biological sex information 



 
			
for a minor unless:



 
			
             (1)  the certificate corrects a clerical error on the 



 
			
original birth certificate;



 
			
             (2)  the original birth certificate does not list the 



 
			
minor's biological sex as required by Section 192.003(f) and the 



 
			
certificate completes the information by listing the minor's 



 
			
biological sex; or



 
			
             (3)  for a minor who at birth had atypical or ambiguous 



 
			
sex organs, chromosomes, or endogenous profile for either male or 



 
			
female and whose sex is later determined, the certificate:



 
			
                   (A)  corrects the biological sex information 



 
			
listed as either male or female on an original birth certificate by 



 
			
listing the minor's determined sex as the other biological sex; or



 
			
                   (B)  completes the biological sex information not 



 
			
previously listed on an original birth certificate by listing the 



 
			
determined sex.



 
			
       SECTION 4.  As soon as practicable after the effective date 



 
			
of this Act, the executive commissioner of the Health and Human 



 
			
Services Commission shall adopt rules necessary to implement the 



 
			
changes in law made by this Act.



 
			
       SECTION 5.  This Act takes effect September 1, 2023.


