

 
 
 



REFERENCE TITLE: unlawful exposure;
  minors; sentencing; reporting




 
 
 
 
State of
  Arizona
Senate
Fifty-sixth
  Legislature
First Regular
  Session
2023
 
 
 




SB 1698




 




Introduced by 
Senator Wadsack: Representatives Jones, McGarr
 



 
 
 
 
An Act
 
amending
sections 8-201, 11-811, 12-741, 13-705 and 13-1425,
Arizona Revised Statutes; amending title 13, chapter 35, Arizona Revised
Statutes, by adding section 13-3508; amending sections 13-3620 and
13-3821, Arizona Revised Statutes; relating to adult oriented
performances and businesses.
 
 
(TEXT OF BILL BEGINS ON NEXT PAGE)
 




Be it enacted by the Legislature of the State of Arizona:
Section 1. Section 8-201, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:
START_STATUTE8-201. Definitions
In this title, unless the context otherwise requires:
1. "Abandoned" means the failure of the
parent to provide reasonable support and to maintain regular contact with the
child, including providing normal supervision. Abandoned includes a
judicial finding that a parent has made only minimal efforts to support and
communicate with the child. Failure to maintain a normal parental
relationship with the child without just cause for a period of six months
constitutes prima facie evidence of abandonment.
2. "Abuse" means the infliction or
allowing of physical injury, impairment of bodily function or disfigurement or
the infliction of or allowing another person to cause serious emotional damage
as evidenced by severe anxiety, depression, withdrawal or untoward aggressive
behavior and which emotional damage is diagnosed by a medical doctor or psychologist
and is caused by the acts or omissions of an individual who has the care,
custody and control of a child. Abuse includes:
(a) Inflicting or allowing sexual abuse pursuant to
section 13-1404, sexual conduct with a minor pursuant to section 13-1405,
sexual assault pursuant to section 13-1406, molestation of a child
pursuant to section 13-1410, commercial sexual exploitation of a minor
pursuant to section 13-3552, sexual exploitation of a minor pursuant to
section 13-3553, incest pursuant to section 13-3608,
Unlawful exposure to an adult oriented performance or adult oriented business
pursuant to section 13-3508 or child sex trafficking pursuant to
section 13-3212.
(b) Physical injury that results from allowing a
child to enter or remain in any structure or vehicle in which volatile, toxic
or flammable chemicals are found or equipment is possessed by any person for
the purpose of manufacturing a dangerous drug as defined in section 13-3401.
(c) Unreasonable confinement of a child.
3. "Adult" means a person who is eighteen
years of age or older.
4. "Adult court" means the appropriate
justice court, municipal court or criminal division of the superior court that
has jurisdiction to hear proceedings concerning offenses committed by juveniles
as provided in sections 8-327 and 13-501.
5. "Award" or "commit" means to
assign legal custody.
6. "Child", "youth" or
"juvenile" means an individual who is under eighteen years of age.
7. "Complaint" means a written statement
of the essential facts constituting a public offense that is any of the
following:
(a) Made on an oath before a judge or commissioner
of the superior court or an authorized juvenile hearing officer.
(b) Made pursuant to section 13-3903.
(c) Accompanied by an affidavit of a law enforcement
officer or employee that swears on information and belief to the accuracy of
the complaint pursuant to section 13-4261.
8. "Criminal conduct allegation" means an
allegation of conduct by a parent, guardian or custodian of a child or an adult
member of the victim's household that, if true, would constitute any of the
following:
(a) A violation of section 13-3623 involving
child abuse.
(b) A felony offense that constitutes domestic
violence as defined in section 13-3601.
(c) A violation of section 13-1404 or 13-1406
involving a minor.
(d) A violation of section 13-1405, 13-1410
or 13-1417.
(e) Any other act of abuse that is classified as a
felony.
(f) An offense that constitutes domestic violence as
defined in section 13-3601 and that involves a minor who is a victim of
or was in imminent danger during the domestic violence.
9. "Custodian" means a person, other than
a parent or legal guardian, who stands in loco parentis to the child or a
person to whom legal custody of the child has been given by order of the
juvenile court.
10. "DCS report" means a communication
received by the centralized intake hotline that alleges child abuse or neglect
and that meets the criteria for a report as prescribed in section 8-455.
11. "Delinquency hearing" means a
proceeding in the juvenile court to determine whether a juvenile has committed
a specific delinquent act as set forth in a petition.
12. "Delinquent act" means an act by a
juvenile that if committed by an adult would be a criminal offense or a petty
offense, a violation of any law of this state, or of another state if the act
occurred in that state, or a law of the United States, or a violation of any
law that can only be violated by a minor and that has been designated as a
delinquent offense, or any ordinance of a city, county or political subdivision
of this state defining crime. Delinquent act does not include an
offense under section 13-501, subsection A or B if the offense is filed
in adult court. Any juvenile who is prosecuted as an adult or who is
remanded for prosecution as an adult shall not be adjudicated as a delinquent
juvenile for the same offense.
13. "Delinquent juvenile" means a child
who is adjudicated to have committed a delinquent act.
14. "Department" means the department of
child safety.
15. "Dependent child":
(a) Means a child who is adjudicated to be:
(i) In need of proper and effective parental care
and control and who has no parent or guardian, or one who has no parent or
guardian willing to exercise or capable of exercising such care and control.
(ii) Destitute or who is not provided with the
necessities of life, including adequate food, clothing, shelter or medical
care.
(iii) A child whose home is unfit by reason of
abuse, neglect, cruelty or depravity by a parent, a guardian or any other
person having custody or care of the child.
(iv) Under eight years of age and who is found to
have committed an act that would result in adjudication as a delinquent
juvenile or incorrigible child if committed by an older juvenile or child.
(v) Incompetent or not restorable to competency and
who is alleged to have committed a serious offense as defined in section 13-706.
(b) Does not include a child who in good faith is
being furnished Christian Science treatment by a duly accredited practitioner
if none of the circumstances described in subdivision (a) of this paragraph
exists.
16. "Detention" means the temporary
confinement of a juvenile who requires secure care in a physically restricting
facility that is completely surrounded by a locked and physically secure
barrier with restricted ingress and egress for the protection of the juvenile
or the community pending court disposition or as a condition of probation.
17. "Director" means the director of the
department.
18. "Health professional" has the same
meaning prescribed in section 32-3201.
19. "Incorrigible child" means a child
who:
(a) Is adjudicated as a child who refuses to obey
the reasonable and proper orders or directions of a parent, guardian or
custodian and who is beyond the control of that person.
(b) Is habitually truant from school as defined in
section 15-803, subsection C.
(c) Is a runaway from the child's home or parent,
guardian or custodian.
(d) Habitually behaves in such a manner as to injure
or endanger the morals or health of self or others.
(e) Commits any act constituting an offense that can
only be committed by a minor and that is not designated as a delinquent act.
(f) Fails to obey any lawful order of a court of
competent jurisdiction given in a noncriminal action.
20. "Independent living program" includes
a residential program with supervision of less than twenty-four hours a
day.
21. "Juvenile court" means the juvenile
division of the superior court when exercising its jurisdiction over children
in any proceeding relating to delinquency, dependency or incorrigibility.
22. "Law enforcement officer" means a
peace officer, sheriff, deputy sheriff, municipal police officer or constable.
23. "Medical director of a mental health
agency":
(a) Means a psychiatrist, or licensed physician
experienced in psychiatric matters, who is designated in writing by the
governing body of the agency as the person in charge of the medical services of
the agency, or a psychiatrist designated by the governing body to act for the
director.  
(b) Includes the superintendent of the state
hospital.
24. "Mental health agency" means any
private or public facility that is licensed by this state as a mental health
treatment agency, a psychiatric hospital, a psychiatric unit of a general
hospital or a residential treatment center for emotionally disturbed children
and that uses secure settings or mechanical restraints.
25. "Neglect" or "neglected"
means:
(a) The inability or unwillingness of a parent,
guardian or custodian of a child to provide that child with supervision, food,
clothing, shelter or medical care if that inability or unwillingness causes
substantial risk of harm to the child's health or welfare, except if the
inability of a parent, guardian or custodian to provide services to meet the
needs of a child with a disability or chronic illness is solely the result of
the unavailability of reasonable services.
(b) Allowing a child to enter or remain in any
structure or vehicle in which volatile, toxic or flammable chemicals are found
or equipment is possessed by any person with the intent and for the purpose of
manufacturing a dangerous drug as defined in section 13-3401.
(c) A determination by a health professional that a
newborn infant was exposed prenatally to a drug or substance listed in section
13-3401 and that this exposure was not the result of a medical treatment
administered to the mother or the newborn infant by a health professional.
This subdivision does not expand a health professional's duty to report neglect
based on prenatal exposure to a drug or substance listed in section 13-3401
beyond the requirements prescribed pursuant to section 13-3620,
subsection E. The determination by the health professional shall be
based on one or more of the following:
(i) Clinical indicators in the prenatal period
including maternal and newborn presentation.
(ii) History of substance use or abuse.
(iii) Medical history.
(iv) Results of a toxicology or other laboratory
test on the mother or the newborn infant.
(d) Diagnosis by a health professional of an infant
under one year of age with clinical findings consistent with fetal alcohol
syndrome or fetal alcohol effects.
(e) Deliberate exposure of a child by a parent,
guardian or custodian to sexual conduct as defined in section 13-3551 or
to sexual contact, oral sexual contact or sexual intercourse as defined in
section 13-1401, bestiality as prescribed in section 13-1411, an adult oriented performance or adult oriented business as
prescribed in section 13-3508 or explicit sexual materials as
defined in section 13-3507.
(f) Any of the following acts committed by the
child's parent, guardian or custodian with reckless disregard as to whether the
child is physically present:
(i) Sexual contact as defined in section 13-1401.
(ii) Oral sexual contact as defined in section 13-1401.
(iii) Sexual intercourse as defined in section 13-1401.
(iv) Bestiality as prescribed in section 13-1411.
26. "Newborn infant" means a child who is
under thirty days of age.
27. "Petition" means a written statement
of the essential facts that allege delinquency, incorrigibility or dependency.
28. "Prevention" means the creation of
conditions, opportunities and experiences that encourage and develop healthy,
self-sufficient children and that occur before the onset of problems. 
29. "Protective supervision" means
supervision that is ordered by the juvenile court of children who are found to
be dependent or incorrigible.
30. "Qualified young adult" means a former
dependent child who is at least eighteen years of age and not over twenty-one
years of age, who meets the criteria for an extended foster care program
pursuant to section 8-521.02 and who signs a voluntary agreement to
participate in the program.
31. "Referral" means a report that is
submitted to the juvenile court and that alleges that a child is dependent or
incorrigible or that a juvenile has committed a delinquent or criminal act.
32. "Secure care" means confinement in a
facility that is completely surrounded by a locked and physically secure
barrier with restricted ingress and egress.
33. "Serious emotional injury" means an
injury that is diagnosed by a medical doctor or a psychologist and that does
any one or a combination of the following:
(a) Seriously impairs mental faculties.
(b) Causes serious anxiety, depression, withdrawal
or social dysfunction behavior to the extent that the child suffers dysfunction
that requires treatment.
(c) Is the result of sexual abuse pursuant to
section 13-1404, sexual conduct with a minor pursuant to section 13-1405,
sexual assault pursuant to section 13-1406, molestation of a child
pursuant to section 13-1410, child sex trafficking pursuant to section 13-3212,
commercial sexual exploitation of a minor pursuant to section 13-3552,
sexual exploitation of a minor pursuant to section 13-3553 or incest
pursuant to section 13-3608.
34. "Serious physical injury" means an
injury that is diagnosed by a medical doctor and that does any one or a
combination of the following:
(a) Creates a reasonable risk of death.
(b) Causes serious or permanent disfigurement.
(c) Causes significant physical pain.
(d) Causes serious impairment of health.
(e) Causes the loss or protracted impairment of an
organ or limb.
(f) Is the result of sexual abuse pursuant to
section 13-1404, sexual conduct with a minor pursuant to section 13-1405,
sexual assault pursuant to section 13-1406, molestation of a child
pursuant to section 13-1410, child sex trafficking pursuant to section 13-3212,
commercial sexual exploitation of a minor pursuant to section 13-3552,
sexual exploitation of a minor pursuant to section 13-3553 or incest
pursuant to section 13-3608.
35. "Shelter care" means the temporary
care of a child in any public or private facility or home that is licensed by
this state and that offers a physically nonsecure environment that is
characterized by the absence of physically restricting construction or hardware
and that provides the child access to the surrounding community. 
36. "Young adult administrative review"
means an administrative review of a voluntary extended foster care case plan
with the qualified young adult, the department's case specialist or designee,
an independent party who is not responsible for the case management of or the
delivery of services to the qualified young adult and any other individual the
young adult invites. END_STATUTE
Sec. 2. Section 11-811, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:
START_STATUTE11-811. Zoning ordinance; zoning districts; definitions
A. Pursuant to this article, the board of
supervisors may adopt a zoning ordinance in order to
conserve and promote the public health, safety, convenience and general
welfare. The zoning ordinance and all rezonings and zoning
regulations amendments adopted under this article shall be consistent with and
conform to the adopted comprehensive plan. In addition to the other matters
that are required or authorized under this section and article 1 of this
chapter, the zoning ordinance:
1. Shall show the zoning districts designated as
appropriate for various classes of residential, business and industrial uses
and shall provide for the establishment of setback lines and other plans
providing for adequate light, air and parking facilities and for expediting
traffic within the districts. 
2. May establish the percentage of a lot or parcel
that may be covered by buildings and the size of yards, courts and other open
spaces.
3. Shall consider access to incident solar energy.
4. May provide for retirement community zoning
districts.
5. May provide for the regulation and use of
business licenses, adult oriented business manager permits and adult service
provider permits in conjunction with the establishment or operation of adult
oriented businesses and facilities, including adult arcades, adult bookstores
or video stores, cabarets, adult live entertainment establishments, adult
motion picture theaters, adult theaters, massage establishments and nude model
studios. With respect to cabarets, the ordinance shall not conflict with
specific statutory or valid regulatory requirements applicable to persons
licensed to dispense alcoholic beverages, but the ordinance may include
regulation of the age and conduct of erotic entertainers in a manner at least
as restrictive as rules adopted under title 4. Notwithstanding section 11-812,
a county in regulating or licensing businesses and facilities pursuant to this
paragraph may impose reasonable operating requirements that affect the existing
uses of businesses and facilities.
6. Shall designate and zone appropriate areas of
reasonable size in which there may be established with reasonable permanency
canneries, fertilizer plants, refineries, commercial feedlots, meat packing
plants, tallow works and other like businesses. A dairy operation,
including areas designated for the raising of replacement heifers or bulls
owned by the same dairy operation, is not subject to this paragraph, and is a
general agricultural purpose under subsection D, paragraph 2 of this section
and section 11-812, subsection A, paragraph 2. A replacement
heifer or bull raising operation of a dairy that is not on contiguous property
of the dairy is subject to this paragraph unless the operation begins within
one-quarter mile of the dairy. 
B. To carry out the purposes of this article, the
board may adopt overlay zoning districts and regulations applicable to
particular buildings, structures and land within individual
zones. For the purposes of this subsection, "overlay zoning
district" means a special zoning district that includes regulations that
modify regulations in another zoning district with which the overlay zoning
district is combined. Overlay zoning districts and regulations shall be
adopted pursuant to section 11-813. The provisions of overlay
zoning shall apply retroactively to authorize overlay zoning districts and
regulations adopted before April 20, 1993.
C. In accordance with article II, sections 1 and 2,
Constitution of Arizona, the board shall consider the individual property
rights and personal liberties of the residents of the county before adopting
any zoning ordinance.
D. This section does not authorize:
1. The imposition of dedications, exactions, fees or
other requirements that are not otherwise authorized by law.
2. The regulation or
restriction of the use or occupation of land or improvements for railroad,
mining, metallurgical, grazing or general agricultural purposes, if the tract
concerned is five or more contiguous commercial acres. For the
purposes of this paragraph, general agricultural purposes do not include the
cultivation of cannabis as defined in section 13-3401 or marijuana as
defined in section 13-3401 or 36-2801.
E. For the purposes of this section:
1. "Adult arcade" means any place to which
the public is permitted allowed or
invited and in which coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically,
electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines,
projectors or other image producing image-producing
devices are maintained to show images involving specific sexual activities or
specific anatomical areas to persons in booths or viewing rooms.
2. "Adult bookstore or video store" means
a commercial establishment that offers for sale or rent any of the following as
one of its principal business purposes:
(a) Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed
matter, photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes or reproductions or
slides or other visual representations that depict or describe specific sexual
activities or specific anatomical areas.
(b) Instruments, devices or paraphernalia that are
designed for use in connection with specific sexual activities.
3. "Adult live entertainment
establishment" means an establishment that features either:
(a) Persons who appear in a state of nudity.
(b) Live performances that are characterized by the
exposure of specific anatomical areas or specific sexual activities.
4. "Adult motion picture theater" means a
commercial establishment in which for any form of consideration films, motion
pictures, videocassettes, slides or other similar photographic reproductions
that are characterized by the depiction or description of specific sexual
activities or specific anatomical areas are predominantly shown.
5. "Adult oriented business" means adult
arcades, adult bookstores or video stores, cabarets, adult live entertainment
establishments, adult motion picture theaters, adult theaters, massage
establishments that offer adult service, drag shows or
establishments that conduct drag shows or nude model studios.
6. "Adult oriented business manager" means
a person on the premises of an adult oriented business who is authorized to
exercise overall operational control of the business.
7. "Adult service" means dancing, serving
food or beverages, modeling, posing, wrestling, singing, reading, talking,
listening or other performances or activities conducted for any consideration
in an adult oriented business by a person who is nude or seminude during all or
part of the time that the person is providing the service.
8. "Adult service provider" or
"erotic entertainer" means any natural person who provides an adult
service.
9. "Adult theater" means a theater,
concert hall, auditorium or similar commercial establishment that predominantly
features persons who appear in a state of nudity or who engage in live
performances that are characterized by the exposure of specific anatomical
areas or specific sexual activities.
10. "Cabaret" means an adult oriented
business licensed to provide alcoholic beverages pursuant to title 4, chapter
2, article 1.
11. "Discernibly turgid state" means the
state of being visibly swollen, bloated, inflated or distended.
12. "Drag show" means a
show or performance for entertainment during which a single performer or group
of performers do both of the following:
(a) Dress in
clothing and use makeup and other physical markers opposite of the performer's
or group of performers' genders at birth to exaggerate gender signifiers and
roles. 
(b) Engage in
singing, dancing or a monologue or skit in order to entertain an audience of
two or more people.
12. 13. "Massage
establishment" means an establishment in which a person, firm, association
or corporation engages in or permits allows
massage activities, including any method of pressure on, friction against,
stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating or stimulating of
external soft parts of the body with the hands or with the aid of any
mechanical apparatus or electrical apparatus or appliance. This paragraph does
not apply to:
(a) Persons who are licensed pursuant to title 32,
chapter 7, 8, 13, 14 or 17.
(b) Registered nurses, licensed practical nurses or
technicians who are acting under the supervision of a physician who is licensed
pursuant to title 32, chapter 13 or 17.
(c) Registered nurse practitioners who are licensed
pursuant to title 32, chapter 15.
(d) Persons who are employed or acting as trainers
for a bona fide amateur, semiprofessional or professional athlete or athletic
team.
(e) Persons who are licensed pursuant to title 32,
chapter 3 or 5 if the activity is limited to the head, face or neck.
13. 14. "Nude
model studio":
(a) Means
a place in which a person who appears in a state of nudity or who displays
specific anatomical areas is observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured,
photographed or otherwise depicted by other persons who pay money or other
consideration. Nude model studio 
(b) Does
not include a proprietary school that is licensed by this state, a college,
community college or university that is supported entirely or in part by
taxation, a private college or university that maintains and operates
educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, community
college or university that is supported entirely or in part by taxation or a
structure to which the following apply:
(a) (i) A sign is not visible from the exterior of the
structure and no other advertising appears indicating that a nude person is
available for viewing.
(b) (ii) A student must enroll at least three days in advance
of a class in order to participate.
(c) (iii) No Not
more than one nude or seminude model is on the premises at any time.
14. 15. "Nude",
"nudity" or "state of nudity" means any of the following:
(a) The appearance of a human anus, genitals or a
female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola.
(b) A state of dress that fails to opaquely cover a
human anus, genitals or a female breast below a point immediately above the top
of the areola.
15. 16. "Principal
business purposes" means that a commercial establishment derives fifty
percent or more of its gross income from the sale or rental of items listed in
paragraph 2 of this subsection.
16. 17. "Seminude"
means a state of dress in which clothing covers no not more than the genitals, pubic region and female breast
below a point immediately above the top of the areola, as well as portions of
the body that are covered by supporting straps or devices.
17. 18. "Specific
anatomical areas" means any of the following:
(a) A human anus, genitals, the pubic region or a
female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola that is
less than completely and opaquely covered.
(b) Male genitals in a discernibly turgid state even
if completely and opaquely covered.
18. 19. "Specific
sexual activities" means any of the following:
(a) Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation
or arousal.
(b) Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or
simulated, including acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, oral
copulation or sodomy.
(c) Fondling or other erotic touching of the human
genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breast.
(d) Excretory functions as part of or in connection
with any of the activities under subdivision (a), (b) or (c) of this paragraph.
END_STATUTE
Sec. 3. Section 12-741, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:
START_STATUTE12-741. Unauthorized disclosure of intimate images; civil action;
exceptions; confidential information form; remedies; statute of limitations;
definitions
A. A person is liable in a civil action for
intentionally disclosing or threatening to disclose an intimate image of
another individual if the depicted individual suffers harm from the disclosure
or threatened disclosure and the person knew or should have known all of the
following:
1. The depicted individual did not consent to the
disclosure.
2. The intimate image was private.
3. The depicted individual was identifiable from the
image itself or from information that is displayed in connection with the
image.
B. Evidence that the depicted individual consented
to the creation of the image or that the depicted individual previously
consented to the disclosure of the image does not by itself establish that the
depicted individual consented to the disclosure of the intimate image or that
the depicted individual lacked a reasonable expectation of privacy.
C. A depicted individual who does not consent to the
specific sexual activities or state of nudity depicted in an intimate image of
the individual retains a reasonable expectation of privacy even if the image
was created when the depicted individual was in a public place.
D. Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, a
person is not liable under this section if the person proves that disclosing or
threatening to disclose the intimate image was any of the following:
1. Made in good faith in any of the following:
(a) Law enforcement.
(b) A legal proceeding.
(c) Medical education or treatment.
2. Made in good faith in reporting or investigating
any of the following:
(a) Unlawful conduct.
(b) Unsolicited and unwelcome conduct.
3. Related to a matter of public concern or public
interest.
4. Reasonably intended to assist the depicted
individual.
5. Made by a parent, legal guardian or individual
with legal custody of a child and the depicted individual is the child unless
the image is disclosed with the intent to harm the depicted individual.
E. Subsection D of this section does not apply if
the plaintiff proves the disclosure was prohibited by law or made for the
purpose of sexual arousal, sexual gratification, humiliation, degradation or
monetary or commercial gain.
F. Disclosing or threatening to disclose an intimate
image is not a matter of public concern or public interest solely because the
depicted individual is a public figure.
G. If the plaintiff files with the court and serves
on the defendant a confidential information form that includes the excluded or
redacted plaintiff's name and other identifying characteristics, the court may
exclude or redact from all pleadings and documents filed in the action other
identifying characteristics of the plaintiff. The court may make
further orders as necessary to protect the identity and privacy of a plaintiff.
H. The prevailing
plaintiff may recover:
1. The greater of:
(a) Economic and
noneconomic damages that are proximately caused by the defendant's disclosure
or threatened disclosure, including damages for emotional distress whether or
not accompanied by other damages.
(b) Statutory damages of not more than $10,000
against each defendant found liable under this section for all of the
defendant's disclosures and threatened disclosures that the plaintiff knew or
reasonably should have known when filing the action or that became known during
the pendency of the action. In determining the amount of statutory
damages under this subdivision, consideration must be given to the age of the
parties at the time of the disclosure or threatened disclosure, the number of
disclosures or threatened disclosures made by the defendant, the breadth of
distribution of the image by the defendant and other exacerbating or mitigating
factors. 
2. An amount equal to any monetary gain made by the
defendant from disclosing or threatening to disclose the intimate image.
3. Punitive damages.
4. Reasonable attorney fees and costs. 
5. Additional relief, including injunctive relief.
I. A civil action for an unauthorized disclosure may
not be brought later than four years after the date that the disclosure was
discovered or should have been discovered with the exercise of reasonable
diligence except that a threat to disclose may not be brought later than four
years after the date of the threat to disclose.
J. In a civil action brought by a depicted
individual who was a minor on the date of the disclosure or threat to disclose,
the time specified in subsection I of this section does not begin to run until
the depicted individual attains the age of majority.
K. For the purposes of this section:
1. "Consent" means affirmative, conscious
and voluntary authorization by an individual with legal capacity to give
authorization.
2. "Depicted individual" means an
individual whose body is shown in whole or in part in an intimate image.
3. "Disclose" or "disclosure"
means to display, distribute, publish, advertise or offer.
4. "Harm" includes physical harm, economic
harm and emotional distress whether or not accompanied by physical or economic
harm.
5. "Intimate image" means a photograph,
film, videotape, digital recording or other similar medium that shows a state
of nudity or specific sexual activities.
6. "Private"
means either of the following:
(a) Created or obtained
under circumstances in which a depicted individual had a reasonable expectation
of privacy.
(b) Made accessible
through theft, bribery, extortion, fraud, false pretenses, voyeurism or
exceeding authorized access to an account, message, file, device, resource or
property.
7. "Specific sexual activities" has the
same meaning prescribed in section 11-811.
8. "State of nudity" has the same meaning
prescribed in section 11-811, subsection E, paragraph 14 15, subdivision (a). END_STATUTE
Sec. 4. Section 13-705, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:
START_STATUTE13-705. Dangerous crimes against children; sentences; definitions
A. A person who is at least eighteen years of age
and who is convicted of a dangerous crime against children in the first degree
involving commercial sexual exploitation of a minor or child sex trafficking
and the person has previously been convicted of a dangerous crime against
children in the first degree shall be sentenced to imprisonment in the custody
of the state department of corrections for natural life. A person who is
sentenced to natural life is not eligible for commutation, parole, work
furlough, work release or release from confinement on any basis for the
remainder of the person's natural life. 
B. A person who is at least eighteen years of age
and who is convicted of a dangerous crime against children in the first degree
involving sexual assault of a minor who is twelve years of age or younger or
sexual conduct with a minor who is twelve years of age or younger shall be
sentenced to life imprisonment and is not eligible for suspension of sentence,
probation, pardon or release from confinement on any basis except as
specifically authorized by section 31-233, subsection A or B until the
person has served thirty-five years or the sentence is commuted. This
subsection does not apply to masturbatory contact.
C. Except as otherwise provided in this section, a
person who is at least eighteen years of age or who has been tried as an adult
and who is convicted of a dangerous crime against children in the first degree
involving attempted first degree murder of a minor who is under twelve years of
age, sexual assault of a minor who is under twelve years of age, sexual conduct
with a minor who is under twelve years of age or manufacturing methamphetamine
under circumstances that cause physical injury to a minor who is under twelve
years of age may be sentenced to life imprisonment and is not eligible for
suspension of sentence, probation, pardon or release from confinement on any
basis except as specifically authorized by section 31-233, subsection A
or B until the person has served thirty-five years or the sentence is
commuted. If a life sentence is not imposed pursuant to this subsection, the
person shall be sentenced to a term of imprisonment as follows:
Minimum Presumptive Maximum
13 years 20 years 27
years 
D. Except as otherwise provided in this section, a
person who is at least eighteen years of age or who has been tried as an adult
and who is convicted of a dangerous crime against children in the first degree
involving second degree murder of a minor who is under fifteen years of age may
be sentenced to life imprisonment and is not eligible for suspension of
sentence, probation, pardon or release from confinement on any basis except as
specifically authorized by section 31-233, subsection A or B until the
person has served thirty-five years or the sentence is commuted. If a
life sentence is not imposed pursuant to this subsection, the person shall be
sentenced to a term of imprisonment as follows:
Minimum Presumptive Maximum
25 years 30 years 35
years 
E. Except as otherwise provided in this section, a
person who is at least eighteen years of age or who has been tried as an adult
and who is convicted of a dangerous crime against children in the first degree
involving attempted first degree murder of a minor who is twelve, thirteen or
fourteen years of age, sexual assault of a minor who is twelve, thirteen or
fourteen years of age, taking a child for the purpose of prostitution, child
sex trafficking, commercial sexual exploitation of a minor, sexual conduct with
a minor who is twelve, thirteen or fourteen years of age or manufacturing
methamphetamine under circumstances that cause physical injury to a minor who
is twelve, thirteen or fourteen years of age or involving or using minors in
drug offenses shall be sentenced to a term of imprisonment as follows:
Minimum Presumptive Maximum
13 years 20 years 27 years
A person who has been previously
convicted of one predicate felony shall be sentenced to a term of imprisonment
as follows:
Minimum Presumptive Maximum
23 years 30 years 37
years
F. Except as otherwise provided in this section, a
person who is at least eighteen years of age or who has been tried as an adult
and who is convicted of a dangerous crime against children in the first degree
involving aggravated assault, unlawful mutilation, molestation of a child,
sexual exploitation of a minor, aggravated luring a minor for sexual
exploitation, child abuse or kidnapping shall be sentenced to a term of
imprisonment as follows:
Minimum Presumptive Maximum
10 years 17 years 24 years
A person who has been previously
convicted of one predicate felony shall be sentenced to a term of imprisonment
as follows:
Minimum Presumptive Maximum
21 years 28 years 35
years
G. Except as otherwise provided in this section, if
a person is at least eighteen years of age or has been tried as an adult and is
convicted of a dangerous crime against children involving luring a minor for
sexual exploitation, sexual extortion, or
unlawful age misrepresentation or unlawful exposure to an adult
oriented performance or adult oriented business pursuant to section 13-3508
and is sentenced to a term of imprisonment, the term of imprisonment is as
follows and the person is not eligible for release from confinement on any
basis except as specifically authorized by section 31-233, subsection A
or B until the sentence imposed by the court has been served or is commuted,
except that if the person is convicted of unlawful age misrepresentation the
person is eligible for release pursuant to section 41-1604.07:
Minimum Presumptive Maximum
5 years 10 years 15 years
A person who has been previously
convicted of one predicate felony shall be sentenced to a term of imprisonment
as follows and the person is not eligible for suspension of sentence,
probation, pardon or release from confinement on any basis except as
specifically authorized by section 31-233, subsection A or B until the
sentence imposed by the court has been served or is commuted, except that if
the person is convicted of unlawful age misrepresentation the person is eligible
for release pursuant to section 41-1604.07:
Minimum Presumptive Maximum
8 years 15 years 22
years
H. Except as otherwise provided in this section, if
a person is at least eighteen years of age or has been tried as an adult and is
convicted of a dangerous crime against children involving sexual abuse or
bestiality under section 13-1411, subsection A, paragraph 2 and is
sentenced to a term of imprisonment, the term of imprisonment is as follows and
the person is not eligible for release from confinement on any basis except as
specifically authorized by section 31-233, subsection A or B until the
sentence imposed by the court has been served, the person is eligible for
release pursuant to section 41-1604.07 or the sentence is commuted:
Minimum Presumptive Maximum
2.5 years 5 years 7.5 years
A person who has been previously
convicted of one predicate felony shall be sentenced to a term of imprisonment
as follows and the person is not eligible for suspension of sentence,
probation, pardon or release from confinement on any basis except as
specifically authorized by section 31-233, subsection A or B until the
sentence imposed by the court has been served, the person is eligible for
release pursuant to section 41-1604.07 or the sentence is commuted:
Minimum Presumptive Maximum
8 years 15 years 22
years
I. Except as otherwise provided in this section, a
person who is at least eighteen years of age or who has been tried as an adult
and who is convicted of a dangerous crime against children in the first degree involving
continuous sexual abuse of a child shall be sentenced to a term of imprisonment
as follows:
Minimum Presumptive Maximum
39 years 60 years 81 years
A person who has been previously
convicted of one predicate felony shall be sentenced to a term of imprisonment
as follows:
Minimum Presumptive Maximum
69 years 90 years 111
years
J. The presumptive sentences prescribed in
subsections C, D, E, and F and I of
this section or subsections G and H of this section if the person has
previously been convicted of a predicate felony may be increased or decreased
pursuant to section 13-701, subsections C, D and E.
K. Except as provided in subsections G, H, M and N
of this section, a person who is sentenced for a dangerous crime against
children in the first degree pursuant to this section is not eligible for
suspension of sentence, probation, pardon or release from confinement on any
basis except as specifically authorized by section 31-233, subsection A
or B until the sentence imposed by the court has been served or commuted.
L. A person who is convicted of any dangerous crime
against children in the first degree pursuant to subsection C, D, E, or F or I of this section and who has
been previously convicted of two or more predicate felonies shall be sentenced
to life imprisonment and is not eligible for suspension of sentence, probation,
pardon or release from confinement on any basis except as specifically authorized
by section 31-233, subsection A or B until the person has served not
fewer than thirty-five years or the sentence is commuted.
M. Notwithstanding chapter 10 of this title, a
person who is at least eighteen years of age or who has been tried as an adult
and who is convicted of a dangerous crime against children in the second degree
pursuant to subsection B, C, E, or F
or I of this section is guilty of a class 3 felony and if the person is
sentenced to a term of imprisonment, the term of imprisonment is as follows and
the person is not eligible for release from confinement on any basis except as
specifically authorized by section 31-233, subsection A or B until the
person has served the sentence imposed by the court, the person is eligible for
release pursuant to section 41-1604.07 or the sentence is commuted: 
Minimum Presumptive Maximum
5 years 10 years 15
years
N. A person who is convicted of any dangerous crime
against children in the second degree and who has been previously convicted of
one or more predicate felonies is not eligible for suspension of sentence,
probation, pardon or release from confinement on any basis except as
specifically authorized by section 31-233, subsection A or B until the
sentence imposed by the court has been served, the person is eligible for
release pursuant to section 41-1604.07 or the sentence is commuted.
O. Section 13-704, subsection J and section 13-707,
subsection B apply to the determination of prior convictions.
P. The sentence imposed on a person by the court for
a dangerous crime against children under subsection H of this section involving
sexual abuse may be served concurrently with other sentences if the offense
involved only one victim. The sentence imposed on a person for any
other dangerous crime against children in the first or second degree shall be
consecutive to any other sentence imposed on the person at any time, including
sexual abuse of the same victim.
Q. In this section, for purposes of punishment an
unborn child shall be treated like a minor who is under twelve years of age.
R. A dangerous crime against children is in the
first degree if it is a completed offense and is in the second degree if it is
a preparatory offense, except attempted first degree murder is a dangerous
crime against children in the first degree.
S. It is not a defense to a dangerous crime against
children that the minor is a person posing as a minor or is otherwise
fictitious if the defendant knew or had reason to know the purported minor was
under fifteen years of age.
T. For the purposes of this section:
1. "Dangerous crime against children"
means any of the following that is committed against a minor who is under
fifteen years of age:
(a) Second degree murder.
(b) Aggravated assault resulting in serious physical
injury or involving the discharge, use or threatening exhibition of a deadly
weapon or dangerous instrument.
(c) Sexual assault.
(d) Molestation of a child.
(e) Sexual conduct with a minor.
(f) Commercial sexual exploitation of a minor.
(g) Sexual exploitation of a minor.
(h) Child abuse as prescribed in section 13-3623,
subsection A, paragraph 1.
(i) Kidnapping.
(j) Sexual abuse.
(k) Taking a child for the purpose of prostitution
as prescribed in section 13-3206.
(l) Child sex trafficking as prescribed in section
13-3212.
(m) Involving or using minors in drug offenses.
(n) Continuous sexual abuse of a child.
(o) Attempted first degree murder.
(p) Sex trafficking.
(q) Manufacturing methamphetamine under
circumstances that cause physical injury to a minor.
(r) Bestiality as prescribed in section 13-1411,
subsection A, paragraph 2.
(s) Luring a minor for sexual exploitation.
(t) Aggravated luring a minor for sexual
exploitation.
(u) Unlawful age misrepresentation.
(v) Unlawful mutilation.
(w) Sexual extortion as
prescribed in section 13-1428.
(x) Unlawful exposure to an adult oriented performance or
adult oriented business pursuant to section 13-3508.
2. "Predicate felony" means any felony involving
child abuse pursuant to section 13-3623, subsection A, paragraph 1, a
sexual offense, conduct involving the intentional or knowing infliction of
serious physical injury or the discharge, use or threatening exhibition of a
deadly weapon or dangerous instrument, or a dangerous crime against children in
the first or second degree. END_STATUTE 
Sec. 5. Section 13-1425, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:
START_STATUTE13-1425. Unlawful disclosure of images depicting states of nudity or
specific sexual activities; classification; definitions
A. It is unlawful for a person to intentionally
disclose an image of another person who is identifiable from the image itself
or from information displayed in connection with the image if all of the
following apply:
1. The person in the image is depicted in a state of
nudity or is engaged in specific sexual activities.
2. The depicted person has a reasonable expectation
of privacy. Evidence that a person has sent an image to another person using
an electronic device does not, on its own, remove the person's reasonable
expectation of privacy for that image.
3. The image is disclosed with the intent to harm,
harass, intimidate, threaten or coerce the depicted person.
B. This section does not apply to any of the
following:
1. The reporting of unlawful conduct.
2. Lawful and common practices of law enforcement,
criminal reporting, legal proceedings or medical treatment.
3. Images involving voluntary exposure in a public
or commercial setting.
4. An interactive computer service, as defined in 47
United States Code section 230(f)(2), or an information service, as defined in
47 United States Code section 153, with regard to content wholly provided by
another party.
5. Any disclosure that is made with the consent of
the person who is depicted in the image.
C. A violation of this section is a class 5 felony,
except that a violation of this section is a:
1. Class 4 felony if the image is disclosed by
electronic means.
2. Class 1 misdemeanor if a person threatens to
disclose but does not disclose an image that if disclosed would be a violation
of this section.
D. For the purposes of this section: 
1. "Disclose" means display, distribute,
publish, advertise or offer.
2. "Disclosed by electronic means" means
delivery to an email address, mobile device, tablet or other electronic device
and includes disclosure on a website.
3. "Harm" means physical injury, financial
injury or serious emotional distress.
4. "Image" means a photograph, videotape,
film or digital recording.
5. "Reasonable expectation of privacy"
means the person exhibits an actual expectation of privacy and the expectation
is reasonable.
6. "Specific sexual activities" has the
same meaning prescribed in section 11-811, subsection E, paragraph 18 19, subdivisions (a) and (b).
7. "State of nudity" has the same meaning
prescribed in section 11-811, subsection E, paragraph 14 15, subdivision (a). END_STATUTE
Sec. 6. Title 13, chapter 35, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended by adding section 13-3508, to read:
START_STATUTE13-3508. Unlawful exposure to an adult oriented performance or business;
minors; classification; definitions
A. A person commits unlawful exposure
to an adult oriented performance or adult oriented business by knowingly doing
any of the following: 
1. Allowing a minor under the
person's custody or control to view an adult oriented performance or enter an
adult oriented business.
2. Allowing a minor to enter or
remain in an adult oriented business or a building or part of a building WHERE
an adult oriented performance is occurring. 
3. Performing or allowing another
person to perform an adult oriented performance if a minor is present.
B. Unlawful exposure to an adult
oriented performance or business is a class 4 felony and if the minor is under
fifteen years of age it is punishable pursuant to section 13-705.
C. For the purposes of this section:
1. "Adult oriented
business" has the same meaning prescribed in section 11-811.
2. "adult oriented performance"
means a show or performance, with or without consideration, that includes any
of the following:
(a) a Person
who appears in a state of nudity or who is seminude.
(b) A person
whose performance is characterized by the exposure of specific anatomical areas
or specific sexual activities.
(c) A
performance that is harmful to minors.
3. "Harmful to minors" has
the same meaning prescribed in section 13-3501. END_STATUTE
Sec. 7. Section 13-3620, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:
START_STATUTE13-3620. Duty to report abuse, physical injury, neglect and denial or
deprivation of medical or surgical care or nourishment of minors; medical
records; exception; violation; classification; definitions
A. Any person who reasonably believes that a minor
is or has been the victim of physical injury, abuse, child abuse, a reportable
offense or neglect that appears to have been inflicted on the minor by other
than accidental means or that is not explained by the available medical history
as being accidental in nature or who reasonably believes there has been a
denial or deprivation of necessary medical treatment or surgical care or
nourishment with the intent to cause or allow the death of an infant who is
protected under section 36-2281 shall immediately report or cause reports
to be made of this information to a peace officer, to the department of child
safety or to a tribal law enforcement or social services agency for any Indian
minor who resides on an Indian reservation, except if the report concerns a
person who does not have care, custody or control of the minor, the report
shall be made to a peace officer only. A member of the clergy, a
Christian Science practitioner or a priest who has received a confidential
communication or a confession in that person's role as a member of the clergy,
as a Christian Science practitioner or as a priest in the course of the
discipline enjoined by the church to which the member of the clergy, the
Christian Science practitioner or the priest belongs may withhold reporting of
the communication or confession if the member of the clergy, the Christian
Science practitioner or the priest determines that it is reasonable and
necessary within the concepts of the religion. This exemption applies only to
the communication or confession and not to personal observations the member of
the clergy, the Christian Science practitioner or the priest may otherwise make
of the minor. For the purposes of this subsection,
"person" means:
1. Any physician, physician's assistant,
optometrist, dentist, osteopathic physician, chiropractor, podiatrist,
behavioral health professional, nurse, psychologist, counselor or social worker
who develops the reasonable belief in the course of treating a patient.
2. Any peace officer, child welfare investigator,
child safety worker, member of the clergy, priest or Christian Science
practitioner.
3. The parent, stepparent or guardian of the minor.
4. School personnel, domestic violence victim
advocates or sexual assault victim advocates who develop the reasonable belief
in the course of their employment.
5. Any other person who has responsibility for the
care or treatment of the minor.
6. Any person who is employed as the immediate or
next higher level supervisor to or administrator of a person who is listed in
paragraph 1, 2, 4 or 5 of this subsection and who develops the reasonable
belief in the course of the supervisor's or administrator's employment, except
that if the supervisor or administrator reasonably believes that the report has
been made by a person who is required to report pursuant to paragraph 1, 2, 4
or 5 of this subsection, the supervisor or administrator is not required to
report pursuant to this paragraph.
B. A report is not required under this section
either:
1. For conduct prescribed by sections 13-1404
and 13-1405 if the conduct involves only minors who are fourteen,
fifteen, sixteen or seventeen years of age and there is nothing to indicate
that the conduct is other than consensual.
2. If a minor is of elementary school age, the
physical injury occurs accidentally in the course of typical playground
activity during a school day, occurs on the premises of the school that the
minor attends and is reported to the legal parent or guardian of the minor and
the school maintains a written record of the incident.
C. If a physician, psychologist or behavioral health
professional receives a statement from a person other than a parent,
stepparent, guardian or custodian of the minor during the course of providing
sex offender treatment that is not court ordered or that does not occur while
the offender is incarcerated in the state department of corrections or the department
of juvenile corrections, the physician, psychologist or behavioral health
professional may withhold the reporting of that statement if the physician,
psychologist or behavioral health professional determines it is reasonable and
necessary to accomplish the purposes of the treatment.
D. Reports shall be made immediately either
electronically or by telephone. The reports shall contain the
following information, if known:
1. The names and addresses of the minor and the
minor's parents or the person or persons having custody of the minor.
2. The minor's age and the nature and extent of the
minor's abuse, child abuse, physical injury or neglect, including any evidence
of previous abuse, child abuse, physical injury or neglect.
3. Any other information that the person believes
might be helpful in establishing the cause of the abuse, child abuse, physical
injury or neglect.
E. A health care professional who is regulated
pursuant to title 32 and who, after a routine newborn physical assessment of a
newborn infant's health status or following notification of positive toxicology
screens of a newborn infant, reasonably believes that the newborn infant may be
affected by the presence of alcohol or a drug listed in section 13-3401
shall immediately report this information, or cause a report to be made, to the
department of child safety. For the purposes of this subsection, "newborn
infant" means a newborn infant who is under thirty days of age.
F. Any person other than one required to report or
cause reports to be made under subsection A of this section who reasonably
believes that a minor is or has been a victim of abuse, child abuse, physical
injury, a reportable offense or neglect may report the information to a peace
officer or to the department of child safety, except if the report concerns a
person who does not have care, custody or control of the minor, the report
shall be made to a peace officer only.
G. A person who has custody or control of medical
records of a minor for whom a report is required or authorized under this
section shall make the records, or a copy of the records, available to a peace
officer, child welfare investigator or child safety worker investigating the
minor's neglect, child abuse, physical injury or abuse on written request for the
records signed by the peace officer, child welfare investigator or child safety
worker. Records disclosed pursuant to this subsection are
confidential and may be used only in a judicial or administrative proceeding or
investigation resulting from a report required or authorized under this
section.
H. When reports are received by a peace officer, the
officer shall immediately notify the department of child
safety. Notwithstanding any other statute, when the department
receives these reports, it shall immediately notify a peace officer in the
appropriate jurisdiction.
I. Any person who is required to receive reports
pursuant to subsection A of this section may take or cause to be taken
photographs of the minor and the vicinity involved. Medical examinations
of the involved minor may be performed.
J. A person who furnishes a report, information or
records required or authorized under this section, or a person who participates
in a judicial or administrative proceeding or investigation resulting from a
report, information or records required or authorized under this section, is
immune from any civil or criminal liability by reason of that action unless the
person acted with malice or unless the person has been charged with or is
suspected of abusing or neglecting the child or children in question.
K. Except for the attorney client privilege or the
privilege under subsection L of this section, no privilege applies to any:
1. Civil or criminal litigation or administrative
proceeding in which a minor's neglect, dependency, abuse, child abuse, physical
injury or abandonment is an issue.
2. Judicial or administrative proceeding resulting
from a report, information or records submitted pursuant to this section.
3. Investigation of a minor's child abuse, physical
injury, neglect or abuse conducted by a peace officer or the department of
child safety.
L. In any civil or criminal litigation in which a
child's neglect, dependency, physical injury, abuse, child abuse or abandonment
is an issue, a member of the clergy, a Christian Science practitioner or a
priest shall not, without his consent, be examined as a witness concerning any
confession made to him in his role as a member of the clergy, a Christian
Science practitioner or a priest in the course of the discipline enjoined by
the church to which he belongs. This subsection does not discharge a member of
the clergy, a Christian Science practitioner or a priest from the duty to
report pursuant to subsection A of this section.
M. If psychiatric records are requested pursuant to
subsection G of this section, the custodian of the records shall notify the
attending psychiatrist, who may excise from the records, before they are made
available:
1. Personal information about individuals other than
the patient.
2. Information regarding specific diagnosis or
treatment of a psychiatric condition, if the attending psychiatrist certifies
in writing that release of the information would be detrimental to the
patient's health or treatment.
N. If any portion of a psychiatric record is excised
pursuant to subsection M of this section, a court, on application of a peace
officer, child welfare investigator or child safety worker, may order that the
entire record or any portion of the record that contains information relevant
to the reported abuse, child abuse, physical injury or neglect be made
available to the peace officer, child welfare investigator or child safety
worker investigating the abuse, child abuse, physical injury or neglect.
O. A person who violates this section is guilty of a
class 1 misdemeanor, except if the failure to report involves a reportable
offense, the person is guilty of a class 6 felony.
P. For the purposes of this section:
1. "Abuse" has the same meaning prescribed
in section 8-201.
2. "Child abuse" means child abuse
pursuant to section 13-3623.
3. "Neglect" has the same meaning
prescribed in section 8-201.
4. "Reportable offense" means any of the
following:
(a) Any offense listed in chapters 14 and 35.1 of
this title or section sections 13-3506.01 and 13-3508.
(b) Surreptitious photographing, videotaping,
filming or digitally recording or viewing a minor pursuant to section 13-3019.
(c) Child sex trafficking pursuant to section 13-3212.
(d) Incest pursuant to section 13-3608.
(e) Unlawful mutilation pursuant to section 13-1214. END_STATUTE
Sec. 8. Section 13-3821, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:
START_STATUTE13-3821. Persons required to register; procedure; identification card;
assessment; definitions
A. A person who has been convicted of or adjudicated
guilty except insane for a violation or attempted violation of any of the
following offenses or who has been convicted of or adjudicated guilty except
insane or not guilty by reason of insanity for an offense committed in another
jurisdiction that if committed in this state would be a violation or attempted
violation of any of the following offenses or an offense that was in effect
before September 1, 1978 and that, if committed on or after September 1, 1978,
has the same elements of an offense listed in this section or who is required
to register by the convicting or adjudicating jurisdiction, within ten days
after the conviction or adjudication or within seventy-two hours,
excluding weekends and legal holidays, after entering and remaining for at
least seventy-two hours in any county of this state, shall register with
the sheriff of that county:
1. Unlawful imprisonment pursuant to section 13-1303
if the victim is under eighteen years of age and the unlawful imprisonment was
not committed by the child's parent.
2. Kidnapping pursuant to section 13-1304 if
the victim is under eighteen years of age and the kidnapping was not committed
by the child's parent.
3. Sexual abuse pursuant to section 13-1404 if
the victim is under eighteen years of age.
4. Sexual conduct with a minor pursuant to section
13-1405.
5. Sexual assault pursuant to section 13-1406.
6. Sexual assault of a spouse if the offense was
committed before August 12, 2005.
7. Molestation of a child pursuant to section 13-1410.
8. Continuous sexual abuse of a child pursuant to
section 13-1417.
9. Taking a child for the purpose of prostitution
pursuant to section 13-3206.
10. Child prostitution pursuant to section 13-3212,
subsection A or subsection B, paragraph 1 or 2 committed before August 9, 2017.
11. Child sex trafficking pursuant to section 13-3212,
subsection A or subsection B, paragraph 1 or 2 committed on or after August 9,
2017.
12. Commercial sexual exploitation of a minor
pursuant to section 13-3552.
13. Sexual exploitation of a minor pursuant to
section 13-3553.
14. Luring a minor for sexual exploitation pursuant
to section 13-3554.
15. A second or subsequent violation of indecent
exposure to a person who is under fifteen years of age pursuant to section 13-1402.
16. A second or subsequent violation of public
sexual indecency to a minor who is under fifteen years of age pursuant to
section 13-1403, subsection B.
17. A third or subsequent violation of indecent
exposure pursuant to section 13-1402.
18. A third or subsequent violation of public sexual
indecency pursuant to section 13-1403.
19. A violation of section 13-3822 or 13-3824.
20. Unlawful age misrepresentation.
21. Aggravated luring a minor for sexual
exploitation pursuant to section 13-3560.
22. Sexual extortion pursuant to section 13-1428
if the victim is under fifteen years of age.
23. Unlawful exposure to an adult
oriented performance or adult oriented business pursuant to section 13-3508.
B. Before the person is released from confinement
the state department of corrections in conjunction with the department of
public safety and each county sheriff shall complete the registration of any
person who was convicted of or adjudicated guilty except insane for a violation
of any offense listed under subsection A of this section. Within three days
after the person's release from confinement, the state department of
corrections shall forward the registered person's records to the department of
public safety and to the sheriff of the county in which the registered person
intends to reside. Registration pursuant to this subsection shall be
consistent with subsection E of this section.
C. Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, the
judge who sentences a defendant for any violation of chapter 14 or 35.1 of this
title or for an offense for which there was a finding of sexual motivation
pursuant to section 13-118 may require the person who committed the
offense to register pursuant to this section.
D. The court may require a person who has been
adjudicated delinquent for an act that would constitute an offense specified in
subsection A or C of this section to register pursuant to this section. Any
duty to register under this subsection shall terminate terminates when the person reaches twenty-five years of
age.
E. A person who has been convicted, adjudicated
guilty except insane or adjudicated delinquent and who is required to register
in the convicting or adjudicating state for an act that would constitute an
offense specified in subsection A or C of this section and who is not a
resident of this state shall be required to register pursuant to this section
if the person is either:
1. Employed full-time or part-time in
this state, with or without compensation, for more than fourteen consecutive
days or for an aggregate period of more than thirty days in a calendar year.
2. Enrolled as a full-time or part-time
student in any school in this state for more than fourteen consecutive days or
for an aggregate period of more than thirty days in a calendar year. For
the purposes of this paragraph, "school" means an educational
institution of any description, public or private, wherever located in this
state.
F. Any duty to register under subsection D or E of
this section for a juvenile adjudication terminates when the person reaches
twenty-five years of age. 
G. The court may order the termination of any duty
to register under this section on successful completion of probation if the
person was under eighteen years of age when the offense for which the person
was convicted or adjudicated guilty except insane was committed.
H. The court may order the suspension or termination
of any duty to register under this section after a hearing held pursuant to
section 13-923.
I. At the time of registering, the person shall sign
or affix an electronic fingerprint to a statement giving such information as
required by the director of the department of public safety, including all
names by which the person is known, any required online identifier, the name of
any website or internet communication service where the identifier is being
used and, if the person owns, possesses or regularly operates a motor vehicle
that is required to be registered under title 28, chapter 7, the make, model,
year of manufacture, color, vehicle identification number, state of
registration and license plate number of the motor vehicle. The
sheriff shall fingerprint and photograph the person and within three days
thereafter shall send copies of the statement, fingerprints and photographs to
the department of public safety and the chief of police, if any, of the place
where the person resides. The information that is required by this
subsection shall include the physical location of the person's residence, the
person's address and whether the person's residence is permanent or
temporary. If the person has a place of residence that is different
from the person's address, the person shall provide the person's address, the
physical location of the person's residence and the name of the owner of the residence
if the residence is privately owned and not offered for rent or lease. If the
person receives mail at a post office box or other place, the person shall
provide the location and number of the post office box or other place. If the
person has more than one residence, the person shall register in person and in
writing every residence and address not less than every ninety days with the
sheriff in whose jurisdiction the person is physically present. If
the person does not have an address or a permanent place of residence, the
person shall provide a description and physical location of any temporary
residence and shall register as a transient not less than every ninety days
with the sheriff in whose jurisdiction the transient is physically present.
J. On the person's initial registration and every
year after the person's initial registration during the month of the person's
birthdate, the person shall report in person to the sheriff of the county in
which the person is registered and confirm in writing all information required
by this section, any required online identifier and the name of any website or
internet communication service where the identifier is being used and the
person shall obtain a new nonoperating identification license or a driver license
from the motor vehicle division in the department of transportation and shall
carry a valid nonoperating identification license or a driver
license. Notwithstanding sections 28-3165 and 28-3171,
the license is valid for one year from the date of issuance, and the person
shall submit to the department of transportation proof of the person's address
and place of residence. The motor vehicle division shall annually
update the person's address and photograph and shall make a copy of the photograph
available to the department of public safety or to any law enforcement
agency. The motor vehicle division shall provide to the department
of public safety daily address updates for persons required to register
pursuant to this section.
K. Except as provided in subsection E or L of this
section, the clerk of the superior court in the county in which a person has
been convicted of or adjudicated guilty except insane for a violation of any
offense listed under subsection A of this section or has been ordered to
register pursuant to subsection C or D of this section shall notify the sheriff
in that county of the conviction or adjudication within ten days after entry of
the judgment.
L. Within ten days after entry of judgment, a court
not of record shall notify the arresting law enforcement agency of an
offender's conviction of or adjudication of guilty except insane for a
violation of section 13-1402. Within ten days after receiving
this information, the law enforcement agency shall determine if the offender is
required to register pursuant to this section. If the law
enforcement agency determines that the offender is required to register, the
law enforcement agency shall provide the information required by section 13-3825
to the department of public safety and shall make community notification as
required by law.
M. A person who is required to register pursuant to
this section because of a conviction or adjudication of guilty except insane
for the unlawful imprisonment of a minor or the kidnapping of a minor is
required to register, absent additional or subsequent convictions or
adjudications, for a period of ten years from the date that the person is
released from prison, jail, probation, community supervision or parole and the
person has fulfilled all restitution obligations. Notwithstanding
this subsection, a person who has a prior conviction or adjudication of guilty
except insane for an offense for which registration is required pursuant to
this section is required to register for life.
N. A person who is required to register pursuant to
this section and who is a student at a public or private institution of
postsecondary education or who is employed, with or without compensation, at a
public or private institution of postsecondary education or who carries on a
vocation at a public or private institution of postsecondary education shall
notify the county sheriff having jurisdiction of the institution of
postsecondary education. The person who is required to register pursuant to
this section shall also notify the sheriff of each change in enrollment or
employment status at the institution.
O. At the time of registering, the sheriff shall
secure a sufficient sample of blood or other bodily substances for
deoxyribonucleic acid testing and extraction from a person who has been
convicted of or adjudicated guilty except insane for an offense committed in
another jurisdiction that if committed in this state would be a violation or
attempted violation of any of the offenses listed in subsection A of this
section or an offense that was in effect before September 1, 1978 and that, if
committed on or after September 1, 1978, has the same elements of an offense
listed in subsection A of this section or who is required to register by the
convicting or adjudicating jurisdiction. The sheriff shall transmit
the sample to the department of public safety.
P. Any person who is required to register under
subsection A of this section shall register the person's required online
identifier and the name of any website or internet communication service where
the identifier is being used or is intended to be used with the sheriff from
and after December 31, 2007, regardless of whether the person was required to
register an identifier at the time of the person's initial registration under
this section.
Q. On conviction of or adjudication of guilty except
insane for any offense for which a person is required to register pursuant to
this section, in addition to any other penalty prescribed by law, the court
shall order the person to pay an additional assessment of $250. This
assessment is not subject to any surcharge. The court shall transmit
the monies received pursuant to this section to the county treasurer. The
county treasurer shall transmit the monies received to the state treasurer. The
state treasurer shall deposit the monies received in the state general
fund. Notwithstanding any other law, the court shall not waive the
assessment imposed pursuant to this section.
R. A person who is required to register pursuant to
this section shall verify the person's residence and address if requested by
the department of public safety pursuant to section 13-3827, subsection
G.
S. For the purposes of this section:
1. "Address" means all locations at which
the person receives mail.
2. "Required online identifier" means any
electronic email address information or instant message, chat, social
networking or other similar internet communication name but does not include a
social security number, date of birth or pin number.
3. "Residence" means:
(a) The person's dwelling place, whether permanent
or temporary.
(b) If the person is transient and does not spend at
least three nights in any location or place within thirty days a thirty-day period, the geographical
geographic areas of the county where the person spends
the nights.
4. "Transient" means a person who does not
have a single and permanent dwelling place. END_STATUTE

