


 
2023S0054-T  01/23/23


 


 

		By: Middleton
S.B. No. 649




 



 		
			

A BILL TO BE ENTITLED




 
			

AN ACT




 
			
relating to participation in athletic activities based on 



 
			
biological sex; providing a civil right to action for K-12 athletes 



 
			
and college athletes.



 
			
       BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF TEXAS:



 
			
       SECTION 1.  SHORT TITLE.  This Act may be cited as the Save 



 
			
Women's Sports Act.



 
			
       SECTION 2.  The heading to Section 33.0834, Education Code, 



 
			
is amended to read as follows:



 
			
       Sec. 33.0834.  [INTERSCHOLASTIC] ATHLETIC PARTICIPATION



 
			
[COMPETITION] BASED ON BIOLOGICAL SEX.



 
			
       SECTION 3.  Section 33.0834, Education Code, is amended by 



 
			
amending Subsections (a) and (b) and adding Subsections (e), (f), 



 
			
and (g) to read as follows:



 
			
       (a)  Except as provided by Subsection (b), an 



 
			
[interscholastic] athletic team or sport sponsored or authorized by 



 
			
a school district, [or] open-enrollment charter school, or any 



 
			
private school that competes against a public school may not allow a 



 
			
student to participate [compete] in an [interscholastic] athletic 



 
			
team or sport [competition] sponsored or authorized by the district 



 
			
or school that is designated for the biological sex opposite to the 



 
			
student's biological sex as correctly stated on:



 
			
             (1)  the student's official birth certificate, as 



 
			
described by Subsection (c); or



 
			
             (2)  if the student's official birth certificate 



 
			
described by Subdivision (1) is unobtainable, another government 



 
			
record that accurately states the student's biological sex.



 
			
       (b)  An [interscholastic] athletic team or sport described 



 
			
by Subsection (a) may allow a female student to participate



 
			
[compete] in an [interscholastic] athletic team or sport



 
			
[competition] that is designated for male students if a 



 
			
corresponding [interscholastic] athletic team or sport



 
			
[competition] designated for female students is not offered or 



 
			
available.



 
			
       (e)  A student shall have a private cause of action for 



 
			
injunctive relief, damages, attorney's fees and costs, and any 



 
			
other relief available under law if the student is:



 
			
             (1)  deprived of an athletic opportunity or suffers any 



 
			
direct or indirect harm as a result of a school district, charter 



 
			
school, or private school knowingly violating this Act; or



 
			
             (2)  subject to retaliation or other adverse action by 



 
			
a school district, charter school, private school, the University 



 
			
Interscholastic League, or any athletic association or 



 
			
organization as a result of reporting a violation of this Act.



 
			
       (f)  Sovereign immunity, governmental immunity, official 



 
			
immunity, and qualified immunity are waived and abrogated and may 



 
			
not be asserted as a defense in any action brought under Subsection 



 
			
(e).



 
			
       (g)  Notwithstanding any other law, the requirements and 



 
			
provisions of this section prevail over any conflicting or 



 
			
potentially conflicting statute, and no statute may be construed to 



 
			
repeal the requirements or provisions of this section in whole or in 



 
			
part, either expressly or by implication, unless the repealing 



 
			
statute explicitly states that it is repealing a requirement or 



 
			
provision of this section.



 
			
       SECTION 4.  Subchapter Z, Chapter 51, Education Code, is 



 
			
amended by adding Section 51.982 to read as follows:



 
			
       Sec. 51.982.  ATHLETIC PARTICIPATION BASED ON BIOLOGICAL 



 
			
SEX.  (a)  Except as provided by Subsection (b), an athletic team or 



 
			
sport sponsored or authorized by a public institution of higher 



 
			
education, public junior college, or any private institution or 



 
			
private junior college that competes against a public institution 



 
			
or public junior college may not allow a student to participate in 



 
			
an athletic team or sport sponsored or authorized by the 



 
			
institution of higher education or junior college that is 



 
			
designated for the biological sex opposite to the student's 



 
			
biological sex as correctly stated on:



 
			
             (1)  the student's official birth certificate, as 



 
			
described by Subsection (c); or



 
			
             (2)  if the student's official birth certificate 



 
			
described by Subdivision (1) is unobtainable, another government 



 
			
record that accurately states the student's biological sex.



 
			
       (b)  An athletic team or sport described by Subsection (a) 



 
			
may allow a female student to participate in an athletic team or 



 
			
sport that is designated for male students if a corresponding 



 
			
athletic team or sport designated for female students is not 



 
			
offered or available.



 
			
       (c)  For purposes of this section, a statement of a student's 



 
			
biological sex on the student's official birth certificate is 



 
			
considered to have correctly stated the student's biological sex 



 
			
only if the statement was:



 
			
             (1)  entered at or near the time of the student's birth; 



 
			
or



 
			
             (2)  modified to correct any type of scrivener or 



 
			
clerical error in the student's biological sex.



 
			
       (d)  A student shall have a private cause of action for 



 
			
injunctive relief, damages, attorney's fees and costs, and any 



 
			
other relief available under law if the student is:



 
			
             (1)  deprived of an athletic opportunity or suffers any 



 
			
direct or indirect harm as a result of an institution of higher 



 
			
education or junior college knowingly violating this Act; or



 
			
             (2)  subject to retaliation or other adverse action by 



 
			
an institution of higher education, junior college, or any athletic 



 
			
association or organization as a result of reporting a violation of 



 
			
this Act.



 
			
       (e)  Sovereign immunity, governmental immunity, official 



 
			
immunity, and qualified immunity are waived and abrogated and may 



 
			
not be asserted as a defense in any action brought under Subsection 



 
			
(d).



 
			
       (f)  Notwithstanding any other law, the requirements and 



 
			
provisions of this section prevail over any conflicting or 



 
			
potentially conflicting statute, and no statute may be construed to 



 
			
repeal the requirements or provisions of this section in whole or in 



 
			
part, either expressly or by implication, unless the repealing 



 
			
statute explicitly states that it is repealing a requirement or 



 
			
provision of this section.



 
			
       SECTION 5.  Chapter 30, Civil Practice and Remedies Code, is 



 
			
amended by adding Section 30.023 to read as follows:



 
			
       Sec. 30.023.  AWARD OF ATTORNEY'S FEES IN ACTIONS 



 
			
CHALLENGING CERTAIN EDUCATION LAWS.  (a)  Notwithstanding any other 



 
			
law, any person, including an entity, attorney, or law firm, who 



 
			
seeks declaratory or injunctive relief to prevent this state, a 



 
			
political subdivision, any governmental entity or public official 



 
			
in this state, or any person in this state from enforcing any 



 
			
statute, ordinance, rule, regulation, or any other type of law that 



 
			
regulates athletic participation based on biological sex in any 



 
			
state or federal court, or that represents any litigant seeking 



 
			
such relief in any state or federal court, is jointly and severally 



 
			
liable to pay the costs and reasonable attorney's fees of the 



 
			
prevailing party, including the costs and reasonable attorney's 



 
			
fees that the prevailing party incurs in its efforts to recover 



 
			
costs and fees.



 
			
       (b)  For purposes of this section, a party is considered a 



 
			
prevailing party if a state or federal court:



 
			
             (1)  dismisses any claim or cause of action brought 



 
			
against the party that seeks the declaratory or injunctive relief 



 
			
described by Subsection (a), regardless of the reason for the 



 
			
dismissal; or



 
			
             (2)  enters judgment in the party's favor on any such 



 
			
claim or cause of action.



 
			
       (c)  A prevailing party may recover costs and attorney's fees 



 
			
under this section only to the extent that those costs and 



 
			
attorney's fees were incurred while defending claims or causes of 



 
			
action on which the party prevailed.



 
			
       (d)  Regardless of whether a prevailing party sought to 



 
			
recover costs or attorney's fees in the underlying action, a 



 
			
prevailing party under this section may bring a civil action to 



 
			
recover costs and attorney's fees against a person, including an 



 
			
entity, attorney, or law firm, that sought declaratory or 



 
			
injunctive relief described by Subsection (a) not later than the 



 
			
third anniversary of the date on which, as applicable:



 
			
             (1)  the dismissal or judgment described by Subsection 



 
			
(b) becomes final on the conclusion of appellate review; or



 
			
             (2)  the time for seeking appellate review expires.



 
			
       (e)  It is not a defense to an action brought under 



 
			
Subsection (d) that:



 
			
             (1)  a prevailing party under this section failed to 



 
			
seek recovery of costs or attorney's fees in the underlying action;



 
			
             (2)  the court in the underlying action declined to 



 
			
recognize or enforce the requirements of this section; or



 
			
             (3)  the court in the underlying action held that any 



 
			
provisions of this section are invalid, unconstitutional, or 



 
			
preempted by federal law, notwithstanding the doctrines of issue or 



 
			
claim preclusion.



 
			
       (f)  Notwithstanding any other law, including Chapter 15, 



 
			
Civil Practice and Remedies Code, a civil action brought under 



 
			
Subsection (d) may be brought in:



 
			
             (1)  the county in which all or a substantial part of 



 
			
the events or omissions giving rise to the claim occurred;



 
			
             (2)  the county of residence for any one of the natural 



 
			
person defendants at the time the cause of action accrued;



 
			
             (3)  the county of the principal office in this state of 



 
			
any one of the defendants that is not a natural person; or



 
			
             (4)  the county of residence for the claimant if the 



 
			
claimant is a natural person residing in this state.



 
			
       (g)  If a civil action is brought under Subsection (d) in any 



 
			
one of the venues described by Subsection (f), then the action may 



 
			
not be transferred to a different venue without the written consent 



 
			
of all parties.



 
			
       (h)  Any contractual choice-of-forum provision that purports 



 
			
to require a civil action under Subsection (d) to be litigated in 



 
			
another forum shall be void as against public policy and may not be 



 
			
enforced in any state or federal court.



 
			
       SECTION 6.  SEVERABILITY.  (a)  Mindful of Leavitt v. Jane 



 
			
L., 518 U.S. 137 (1996), in which in the context of determining the 



 
			
severability of a state statute the United States Supreme Court 



 
			
held that an explicit statement of legislative intent is 



 
			
controlling, it is the intent of the legislature that every 



 
			
provision, section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or word 



 
			
in this Act, and every application of the provisions in this Act to 



 
			
every person, group of persons, or circumstances, are severable 



 
			
from each other.



 
			
       (b)  If any application of any provision in this Act to any 



 
			
person, group of persons, or circumstances is found by a court to be 



 
			
invalid, preempted, or unconstitutional, for any reason 



 
			
whatsoever, then the remaining applications of that provision to 



 
			
all other persons and circumstances shall be severed and preserved 



 
			
and shall remain in effect.  All constitutionally valid 



 
			
applications of the provisions in this Act shall be severed from any 



 
			
applications that a court finds to be invalid, preempted, or 



 
			
unconstitutional, because it is the legislature's intent and 



 
			
priority that every single valid application of every statutory 



 
			
provision be allowed to stand alone.



 
			
       (c)  The legislature further declares that it would have 



 
			
enacted this Act, and each provision, section, subsection, 



 
			
sentence, clause, phrase, or word and all constitutional 



 
			
applications of the provisions of this Act, irrespective of the 



 
			
fact that any provision, section, subsection, sentence, clause, 



 
			
phrase, or word or applications of this Act were to be declared 



 
			
invalid, preempted, or unconstitutional.



 
			
       (d)  If any provision of this Act is found by any court to be 



 
			
unconstitutionally vague, then the applications of that provision 



 
			
that do not present constitutional vagueness problems shall be 



 
			
severed and remain in force, consistent with the severability 



 
			
requirements of Subsections (a), (b), and (c) of this section.



 
			
       (e)  No court may decline to enforce the severability 



 
			
requirements of Subsections (a), (b), (c), and (d) of this section 



 
			
on the ground that severance would "rewrite" the statute or involve 



 
			
the court in legislative or lawmaking activity.  A court that 



 
			
declines to enforce or enjoins a state official from enforcing a 



 
			
statutory provision is never rewriting a statute or engaging in 



 
			
legislative or lawmaking activity, as the statute continues to 



 
			
contain the same words as before the court's decision.  A judicial 



 
			
injunction or declaration of unconstitutionality:



 
			
             (1)  is nothing more than an edict prohibiting 



 
			
enforcement of the disputed statute against the named parties to 



 
			
that lawsuit, which may subsequently be vacated by a later court if 



 
			
that court has a different understanding of the requirements of the 



 
			
Texas Constitution or United States Constitution;



 
			
             (2)  is not a formal amendment of the language in a 



 
			
statute; and



 
			
             (3)  no more rewrites a statute than a decision by the 



 
			
executive not to enforce a duly enacted statute in a limited and 



 
			
defined set of circumstances.



 
			
       (f)  If any state or federal court disregards any of the 



 
			
severability requirements in Subsection (a), (b), (c), (d), or (e), 



 
			
of this section and declares or finds any provision of this Act 



 
			
facially invalid, preempted, or unconstitutional, when there are 



 
			
discrete applications of that provision that can be enforced 



 
			
against a person, group of persons, or circumstances without 



 
			
violating federal law or the federal or state constitutions, then 



 
			
that provision shall be interpreted, as a matter of state law, as if 



 
			
the legislature had enacted a provision limited to the persons, 



 
			
group of persons, or circumstances for which the provision's 



 
			
application will not violate federal law or the federal or state 



 
			
constitutions, and every court shall adopt this saving construction 



 
			
of that provision until the court ruling that pronounced the 



 
			
provision facially invalid, preempted, or unconstitutional is 



 
			
vacated or overruled.



 
			
       SECTION 7.  This Act takes effect immediately if it receives 



 
			
a vote of two-thirds of all the members elected to each house, as 



 
			
provided by Section 39, Article III, Texas Constitution.  If this 



 
			
Act does not receive the vote necessary for immediate effect, this 



 
			
Act takes effect September 1, 2023.


