


MISSISSIPPI LEGISLATURE
2023 Regular Session
To: Public Health and Human Services
By: Representatives Newman, Gunn, Eubanks, Tullos, Brown
(20th), Williamson, Hopkins
House Bill 1125
AN ACT TO CREATE THE "REGULATE EXPERIMENTAL ADOLESCENT PROCEDURES
(REAP)" ACT FOR ANY PERSON UNDER EIGHTEEN YEARS OF AGE; TO PROVIDE DEFINITIONS
FOR THE ACT; TO PROHIBIT THE DIRECT OR INDIRECT USE, GRANT, PAYMENT OR
DISTRIBUTION OF PUBLIC FUNDS TO ANY ENTITY, ORGANIZATION OR INDIVIDUAL THAT PROVIDES
GENDER TRANSITION PROCEDURES TO A PERSON UNDER EIGHTEEN
YEARS OF AGE; TO PROVIDE THAT HEALTH CARE SERVICES FURNISHED IN A STATE OR
LOCALLY-OWNED HEALTH CARE FACILITY OR BY A PHYSICIAN OR OTHER HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONAL
EMPLOYED BY THE STATE OR LOCAL GOVERNMENT SHALL NOT INCLUDE GENDER TRANSITION PROCEDURES
FOR A PERSON UNDER  EIGHTEEN YEARS OF AGE; TO PROVIDE THAT AMOUNTS PAID DURING
A TAXABLE YEAR FOR PROVISION OF GENDER TRANSITION PROCEDURES OR AS PREMIUMS FOR
HEALTH CARE COVERAGE THAT INCLUDES COVERAGE FOR GENDER TRANSITION PROCEDURES
ARE NOT DEDUCTIBLE UNDER THE STATE INCOME TAX LAWS; TO AUTHORIZE THE ATTORNEY
GENERAL TO BRING AN ACTION TO ENFORCE COMPLIANCE WITH THIS ACT; TO CREATE NEW
SECTION 43-13-117.7, MISSISSIPPI CODE OF 1972, TO PROHIBIT THE DIVISION OF
MEDICAID FROM REIMBURSING OR PROVIDING COVERAGE FOR GENDER TRANSITION
PROCEDURES FOR A PERSON UNDER EIGHTEEN YEARS OF AGE; TO AMEND SECTION 83-9-22,
MISSISSIPPI CODE OF 1972, TO PROVIDE THAT HEALTH COVERAGE PLANS ARE NOT REQUIRED
TO INCLUDE GENDER TRANSITION PROCEDURES; TO CREATE NEW SECTION 83-9-37,
MISSISSIPPI CODE OF 1972, TO PROVIDE THAT A HEALTH BENEFIT PLAN UNDER AN
INSURANCE POLICY OR OTHER PLAN PROVIDING HEALTH CARE COVERAGE SHALL NOT INCLUDE
REIMBURSEMENT FOR GENDER TRANSITION PROCEDURES FOR A PERSON UNDER EIGHTEEN
YEARS OF AGE; TO AMEND SECTIONS 27-7-17, 73-15-29 AND 73-25-29, MISSISSIPPI
CODE OF 1972, TO CONFORM TO THE PROVISIONS OF THIS ACT; TO AMEND SECTION 73-25-33,
MISSISSIPPI CODE OF 1972, TO EXCLUDE THE PERFORMANCE GENDER TRANSITION PROCEDURES
FROM THE "PRACTICE OF MEDICINE" MEANING; TO AMEND SECTION 11-46-5,
MISSISSIPPI CODE OF 1972, TO EXCLUDE FROM TORT IMMUNITY VIOLATIONS OF THIS ACT;
TO AMEND SECTION 41-41-219, MISSISSIPPI CODE OF 1972, TO CONFORM TO THE PRECEDING
SECTION; TO PROVIDE SEVERABILITY IF ANY PART OF THIS ACT IS FOUND UNCONSTITUTIONAL;
AND FOR RELATED PURPOSES.
     BE IT ENACTED BY THE
LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF MISSISSIPPI:
     SECTION 1.  This
act shall be known and may be cited as the "Regulate Experimental Adolescent
Procedures (REAP) Act.  
     SECTION 2.  For
purposes of this act, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed
herein:
          (a)  "Sex"
means the biological indication of male and female in the context of reproductive
potential or capacity, such as sex chromosomes, naturally occurring sex
hormones, gonads, and nonambiguous internal and external genitalia present at
birth, without regard to an individual's psychological, chosen, or subjective
experience of gender;
          (b)  "Cross-sex
hormones" means:
               (i)  Testosterone
or other androgens given to females in amounts that are larger or more potent
than would normally occur naturally in healthy sex females; and
               (ii)  Estrogen
given to males in amounts that are larger or more potent than would normally
occur naturally in healthy sex males;
          (c)  "Gender"
means the psychological, behavioral, social, and cultural aspects of being male
or female;
          (d)  "Gender
reassignment surgery" means any medical or surgical service that seeks to surgically
alter or remove healthy physical or anatomical characteristics or features, except
for a male circumcision that are typical for the individual's sex, in order to
instill or create physiological or anatomical characteristics that resemble a sex
different from the individual's sex, including, without limitation:
               (i)  Surgical
procedures such as penectomy, castration, orchiectomy, vaginoplasty,
clitoroplasty, or vulvoplasty for male patients;
               (ii) Surgical procedures
such as hysterectomy, oophorectomy, reconstruction of the urethra, metoidioplasty,
phalloplasty, vaginectomy, scrotoplasty, or implantation of erection or
testicular prostheses for female patients;
               (iii)  Surgical
procedures such as augmentation mammoplasty, facial feminization surgery, liposuction,
lipofilling, voice surgery, thyroid cartilage reduction, gluteal augmentation,
hair reconstruction, or various aesthetic procedures for male patients; or
               (iv)  Surgical procedures
such as subcutaneous mastectomy, voice surgery, liposuction, lipofilling,
pectoral implants, or various aesthetic procedures for female patients;
          (e)  "Gender
transition" means the process in which a person goes from identifying with
and living as a gender that corresponds to his or her sex to identifying with
and living as a gender different from his or her sex, and may involve social,
legal, or physical changes;
          (f)  (i)  "Gender
transition procedures" means any of the following medical or surgical services
performed for the purpose of assisting an individual with a gender transition:
                    1.  Prescribing
or administering puberty-blocking drugs;
                    2.  Prescribing
or administering cross-sex hormones; or
                    3.  Performing
gender reassignment surgeries.
               (ii)  "Gender
transition procedures" do not include:
                    1.  Services
to persons born with a medically verifiable disorder of sex development,
including a person with external sex characteristics that are irresolvably
ambiguous, such as those born with forty-six (46) XX chromosomes with virilization,
forty-six (46) XY chromosomes with undervirilization, or having both ovarian
and testicular tissue;
                    2.  Services
provided when a physician has otherwise diagnosed a disorder of sexual
development that the physician has determined through genetic or biochemical
testing that the person does not have normal sex chromosome structure, sex
steroid hormone production, or sex steroid hormone action;
                    3.  The
treatment of any infection, injury, disease, or disorder that has been caused
by or exacerbated by the performance of gender transition procedures, whether
or not the gender transition procedure was performed in accordance with state
and federal law or whether or not the funding for the gender transition
procedure is permissible under this act; or
                    4.  Any
procedure for a male circumcision;
          (g)  "Health care
professional" means a person who is licensed, certified, or otherwise
authorized by the laws of this state to administer health care in the ordinary
course of the practice of his or her profession;
          (h)  "Physician"
means a person who is licensed to practice medicine in this state as provided in
Sections 73-25-1 etc.;
          (i)  "Puberty-blocking
drugs" means gonadotropin-releasing hormone analogues or other synthetic
drugs used in males to stop luteinizing hormone secretion and therefore testosterone
secretion, or synthetic drugs used in females which stop the production of
estrogens and progesterone, when used to delay or suppress pubertal development
in children for the purpose of assisting an individual with a gender transition;
and
          (j)  "Public funds"
means federal, state, county, or local government monies, in addition to any
department, agency, or instrumentality authorized or appropriated under state
law or derived from any fund in which such monies are deposited.
     SECTION 3.  (1)
 A person shall not knowingly provide gender transition procedures to any person
under eighteen (18) years of age.
     (2)  A person shall not knowingly
engage in conduct that aids or abets the performance or inducement of gender transition
procedures to any person under eighteen (18) years of age.  This subsection may
not be construed to impose liability on any speech protected by federal or
state law.
     SECTION 4.  Prohibition
on use of public funds or tax deduction for gender transition procedures.  (1)
 Public funds, resources, facilities, personnel or any other
thing of value that is provided by the United States or the State of Mississippi
shall not be directly or indirectly used, granted, paid, or distributed to any
entity, organization, or individual that provides gender transition procedures
to a person under eighteen (18) years of age in violation of this act.
     (2)  Health
care services furnished in the following situations shall not include gender
transition procedures for a person under eighteen (18) years of age:
          (a)  By or in a health care
facility owned by the state or a county or local government; or
          (b)  By a physician or
other health care professional employed by the state or a county or local
government.
     (3)  Any
amount paid by an individual or an entity during a taxable year for provision
of gender transition procedures or as premiums for health care coverage that includes
coverage for gender transition procedures is not deductible under the state income
tax laws.
     SECTION 5.  Enforcement.
 (1)  Any violation of Section 3 by a physician or other
health care professional shall be considered outside the applicable standard of
care and is unprofessional conduct.  A physician who violates Section 3 shall have
his or her license to practice medicine in the State of Mississippi revoked pursuant
to action taken by the Mississippi State Board of Medical Licensure.  A nonphysician
healthcare professional who violates Section 3 shall have his or her license to
practice their healthcare profession in the State of Mississippi revoked pursuant
to action taken by the applicable licensing entity.
     (2)  A person may assert an
actual or threatened violation of this act as a claim or defense in a judicial or
administrative proceeding and obtain compensatory damages, punitive damages, injunctive
relief, declaratory relief, or any other appropriate relief.  Such claim may be
brought against any facility, individual or entity causing or contributing to a
violation of this act.
     (3)  (a)  A person must
bring a claim for a violation of this act no later than thirty (30) years after
the day the cause of action accrues.
          (b)  A person under eighteen
(18) years of age may bring an action throughout their minority through a
parent or next friend, and may bring an action in their own name upon reaching
majority at any time from that point until thirty (30) years after reaching the
age of majority.
     (4)  Notwithstanding any
other provision of law, an action under this act may be commenced, and relief
may be granted, in a judicial proceeding without regard to whether the person
commencing the action has sought or exhausted available administrative remedies.
     (5)  In any action or
proceeding to enforce a provision of this act, a prevailing party who
establishes a violation of this act shall recover reasonable attorney's fees.
     (6)  (a)  The Attorney General shall bring an action to enforce
compliance with this act.
          (b)  This act does not deny,
impair, or otherwise affect any right or authority of the Attorney General, the
State of Mississippi, or any agency, officer, or employee of the state, acting
under any law other than this act, to institute or intervene in any proceeding.
     SECTION 6.  Section
27-7-17, Mississippi Code of 1972, is amended as follows:
     27-7-17.  In computing taxable
income, there shall be allowed as deductions:
     (1)  Business deductions.
          (a)  Business expenses. 
All the ordinary and necessary expenses paid or incurred during the taxable year
in carrying on any trade or business, including a reasonable allowance for salaries
or other compensation for personal services actually rendered; nonreimbursable traveling
expenses incident to current employment, including a reasonable amount expended
for meals and lodging while away from home in the pursuit of a trade or business;
and rentals or other payments required to be made as a condition of the continued
use or possession, for purposes of the trade or business of property to which the
taxpayer has not taken or is not taking title or in which he had no equity.  Expense
incurred in connection with earning and distributing nontaxable income is not an
allowable deduction.  Limitations on entertainment expenses shall conform to the
provisions of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.  There shall also be allowed a
deduction for expenses as provided in Section 41-137-51.
          (b)  Interest.  All
interest paid or accrued during the taxable year on business indebtedness, except
interest upon the indebtedness for the purchase of tax-free bonds, or any stocks,
the dividends from which are nontaxable under the provisions of this article; provided,
however, in the case of securities dealers, interest payments or accruals on loans,
the proceeds of which are used to purchase tax-exempt securities, shall be deductible
if income from otherwise tax-free securities is reported as income.  Investment
interest expense shall be limited to investment income.  Interest expense incurred
for the purchase of treasury stock, to pay dividends, or incurred as a result of
an undercapitalized affiliated corporation may not be deducted unless an ordinary
and necessary business purpose can be established to the satisfaction of the commissioner.
 For the purposes of this paragraph, the phrase "interest upon the indebtedness
for the purchase of tax-free bonds" applies only to the indebtedness incurred
for the purpose of directly purchasing tax-free bonds and does not apply to any
other indebtedness incurred in the regular course of the taxpayer's business.  Any
corporation, association, organization or other entity taxable under Section 27-7-23(c)
shall allocate interest expense as provided in Section 27-7-23(c)(3)(I).
          (c)  Taxes.  Taxes
paid or accrued within the taxable year, except state and federal income taxes,
excise taxes based on or measured by net income, estate and inheritance taxes, gift
taxes, cigar and cigarette taxes, gasoline taxes, and sales and use taxes unless
incurred as an item of expense in a trade or business or in the production of taxable
income.  In the case of an individual, taxes permitted as an itemized deduction
under the provisions of subsection (3)(a) of this section are to be claimed thereunder.
          (d)  Business losses.
              (i)  Losses sustained
during the taxable year not compensated for by insurance or otherwise, if incurred
in trade or business, or nonbusiness transactions entered into for profit.
               (ii)  Limitations on
losses from passive activities and rental real estate shall conform to the provisions
of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
          (e)  Bad debts. 
Losses from debts ascertained to be worthless and charged off during the taxable
year, if sustained in the conduct of the regular trade or business of the taxpayer;
provided, that such losses shall be allowed only when the taxpayer has reported
as income, on the accrual basis, the amount of such debt or account.
          (f)  Depreciation. 
A reasonable allowance for exhaustion, wear and tear of property used in the trade
or business, or rental property, and depreciation upon buildings based upon their
reasonable value as of March 16, 1912, if acquired prior thereto, and upon cost
if acquired subsequent to that date.  In the case of new or used aircraft, equipment,
engines, or other parts and tools used for aviation, allowance for bonus depreciation
conforms with the federal bonus depreciation rates and reasonable allowance for
depreciation under this section is no less than one hundred percent (100%). 
          (g)  Depletion.  In
the case of mines, oil and gas wells, other natural deposits and timber, a reasonable
allowance for depletion and for depreciation of improvements, based upon cost, including
cost of development, not otherwise deducted, or fair market value as of March 16,
1912, if acquired prior to that date, such allowance to be made upon regulations
prescribed by the commissioner, with the approval of the Governor.
          (h)  Contributions or
gifts.  Except as otherwise provided in paragraph (p) of this subsection or
subsection (3)(a) of this section for individuals, contributions or gifts made by
corporations within the taxable year to corporations, organizations, associations
or institutions, including Community Chest funds, foundations and trusts created
solely and exclusively for religious, charitable, scientific or educational purposes,
or for the prevention of cruelty to children or animals, no part of the net earnings
of which inure to the benefit of any private stockholder or individual.  This deduction
shall be allowed in an amount not to exceed twenty percent (20%) of the net income. 
Such contributions or gifts shall be allowable as deductions only if verified under
rules and regulations prescribed by the commissioner, with the approval of the Governor. 
Contributions made in any form other than cash shall be allowed as a deduction,
subject to the limitations herein provided, in an amount equal to the actual market
value of the contributions at the time the contribution is actually made and consummated.
          (i)  Reserve funds -
insurance companies.  In the case of insurance companies the net additions required
by law to be made within the taxable year to reserve funds when such reserve funds
are maintained for the purpose of liquidating policies at maturity.
          (j)  Annuity income. 
The sums, other than dividends, paid within the taxpayer year on policy or annuity
contracts when such income has been included in gross income.
          (k)  Contributions to
employee pension plans.  Contributions made by an employer to a plan or a trust
forming part of a pension plan, stock bonus plan, disability or death-benefit plan,
or profit-sharing plan of such employer for the exclusive benefit of some or all
of his, their, or its employees, or their beneficiaries, shall be deductible from
his, their, or its income only to the extent that, and for the taxable year in which,
the contribution is deductible for federal income tax purposes under the Internal
Revenue Code of 1986 and any other provisions of similar purport in the Internal
Revenue Laws of the United States, and the rules, regulations, rulings and determinations
promulgated thereunder, provided that:
              (i)  The plan or trust
be irrevocable.
               (ii)  The plan or trust
constitute a part of a pension plan, stock bonus plan, disability or death-benefit
plan, or profit-sharing plan for the exclusive benefit of some or all of the employer's
employees and/or officers, or their beneficiaries, for the purpose of distributing
the corpus and income of the plan or trust to such employees and/or officers, or
their beneficiaries.
              (iii)  No part of the
corpus or income of the plan or trust can be used for purposes other than for the
exclusive benefit of employees and/or officers, or their beneficiaries.
     Contributions to all plans or
to all trusts of real or personal property (or real and personal property combined)
or to insured plans created under a retirement plan for which provision has been
made under the laws of the United States of America, making such contributions deductible
from income for federal income tax purposes, shall be deductible only to the same
extent under the Income Tax Laws of the State of Mississippi.
          (l)  Net operating loss
carrybacks and carryovers.  A net operating loss for any taxable year ending
after December 31, 1993, and taxable years thereafter, shall be a net operating
loss carryback to each of the three (3) taxable years preceding the taxable year
of the loss.  If the net operating loss for any taxable year is not exhausted by
carrybacks to the three (3) taxable years preceding the taxable year of the loss,
then there shall be a net operating loss carryover to each of the fifteen (15) taxable
years following the taxable year of the loss beginning with any taxable year after
December 31, 1991.
     For any taxable year ending after
December 31, 1997, the period for net operating loss carrybacks and net operating
loss carryovers shall be the same as those established by the Internal Revenue Code
and the rules, regulations, rulings and determinations promulgated thereunder as
in effect at the taxable year end or on December 31, 2000, whichever is earlier.
     A net operating loss for any
taxable year ending after December 31, 2001, and taxable years thereafter, shall
be a net operating loss carryback to each of the two (2) taxable years preceding
the taxable year of the loss.  If the net operating loss for any taxable year is
not exhausted by carrybacks to the two (2) taxable years preceding the taxable year
of the loss, then there shall be a net operating loss carryover to each of the twenty
(20) taxable years following the taxable year of the loss beginning with any taxable
year after the taxable year of the loss.
     The term "net operating
loss," for the purposes of this paragraph, shall be the excess of the deductions
allowed over the gross income; provided, however, the following deductions shall
not be allowed in computing same:
               (i)  No net operating
loss deduction shall be allowed.
              (ii)  No personal exemption
deduction shall be allowed.
              (iii)  Allowable deductions
which are not attributable to taxpayer's trade or business shall be allowed only
to the extent of the amount of gross income not derived from such trade or business.
     Any taxpayer entitled to a carryback
period as provided by this paragraph may elect to relinquish the entire carryback
period with respect to a net operating loss for any taxable year ending after December
31, 1991.  The election shall be made in the manner prescribed by the Department
of Revenue and shall be made by the due date, including extensions of time, for
filing the taxpayer's return for the taxable year of the net operating loss for
which the election is to be in effect.  The election, once made for any taxable
year, shall be irrevocable for that taxable year.
          (m)  Amortization of
pollution or environmental control facilities.  Allowance of deduction.  Every
taxpayer, at his election, shall be entitled to a deduction for pollution or environmental
control facilities to the same extent as that allowed under the Internal Revenue
Code and the rules, regulations, rulings and determinations promulgated thereunder.
          (n)  Dividend distributions
- real estate investment trusts.  "Real estate investment trust" (hereinafter
referred to as REIT) shall have the meaning ascribed to such term in Section 856
of the federal Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended.  A REIT is allowed a dividend
distributed deduction if the dividend distributions meet the requirements of Section
857 or are otherwise deductible under Section 858 or 860, federal Internal Revenue
Code of 1986, as amended.  In addition:
              (i)  A dividend distributed
deduction shall only be allowed for dividends paid by a publicly traded REIT.  A
qualified REIT subsidiary shall be allowed a dividend distributed deduction if its
owner is a publicly traded REIT.
              (ii)  Income generated
from real estate contributed or sold to a REIT by a shareholder or related party
shall not give rise to a dividend distributed deduction, unless the shareholder
or related party would have received the dividend distributed deduction under this
chapter.
              (iii)  A holding corporation
receiving a dividend from a REIT shall not be allowed the deduction in Section 27-7-15(4)(t).
              (iv)  Any REIT not allowed
the dividend distributed deduction in the federal Internal Revenue Code of 1986,
as amended, shall not be allowed a dividend distributed deduction under this chapter.
     The commissioner is authorized
to promulgate rules and regulations consistent with the provisions in Section 269
of the federal Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, so as to prevent the evasion
or avoidance of state income tax.
          (o)  Contributions to
college savings trust fund accounts.  Contributions or payments to a Mississippi
Affordable College Savings Program account are deductible as provided under Section
37-155-113.  Payments made under a prepaid tuition contract entered into under the
Mississippi Prepaid Affordable College Tuition Program are deductible as provided
under Section 37-155-17.
          (p)  Contributions of
human pharmaceutical products.  To the extent that a "major supplier"
as defined in Section 27-13-13(2)(d) contributes human pharmaceutical products in
excess of Two Hundred Fifty Million Dollars ($250,000,000.00) as determined under
Section 170 of the Internal Revenue Code, the charitable contribution limitation
associated with those donations shall follow the federal limitation but cannot result
in the Mississippi net income being reduced below zero.
          (q)  Contributions to
ABLE trust fund accounts.  Contributions or payments to a Mississippi Achieving
a Better Life Experience (ABLE) Program account are deductible as provided under
Section 43-28-13.
     (2)  Restrictions on the deductibility
of certain intangible expenses and interest expenses with a related member.
          (a)  As used in this subsection
(2):
              (i)  "Intangible
expenses and costs" include:
                   1.  Expenses, losses
and costs for, related to, or in connection directly or indirectly with the direct
or indirect acquisition, use, maintenance or management, ownership, sale, exchange
or any other disposition of intangible property to the extent such amounts are allowed
as deductions or costs in determining taxable income under this chapter;
                   2.  Expenses or
losses related to or incurred in connection directly or indirectly with factoring
transactions or discounting transactions;
                    3.  Royalty, patent,
technical and copyright fees;
                    4.  Licensing
fees; and 
                   5.  Other similar
expenses and costs.
               (ii)  "Intangible
property" means patents, patent applications, trade names, trademarks, service
marks, copyrights and similar types of intangible assets.
              (iii)  "Interest
expenses and cost" means amounts directly or indirectly allowed as deductions
for purposes of determining taxable income under this chapter to the extent such
interest expenses and costs are directly or indirectly for, related to, or in connection
with the direct or indirect acquisition, maintenance, management, ownership, sale,
exchange or disposition of intangible property.
              (iv)  "Related
member" means an entity or person that, with respect to the taxpayer during
all or any portion of the taxable year, is a related entity, a component member
as defined in the Internal Revenue Code, or is an entity or a person to or from
whom there is attribution of stock ownership in accordance with Section 1563(e)
of the Internal Revenue Code.
               (v)  "Related
entity" means:
                    1.  A stockholder
who is an individual or a member of the stockholder's family, as defined in regulations
prescribed by the commissioner, if the stockholder and the members of the stockholder's
family own, directly, indirectly, beneficially or constructively, in the aggregate,
at least fifty percent (50%) of the value of the taxpayer's outstanding stock;
                   2.  A stockholder,
or a stockholder's partnership, limited liability company, estate, trust or corporation,
if the stockholder and the stockholder's partnerships, limited liability companies,
estates, trusts and corporations own, directly, indirectly, beneficially or constructively,
in the aggregate, at least fifty percent (50%) of the value of the taxpayer's outstanding
stock;
                   3.  A corporation,
or a party related to the corporation in a manner that would require an attribution
of stock from the corporation to the party or from the party to the corporation,
if the taxpayer owns, directly, indirectly, beneficially or constructively, at least
fifty percent (50%) of the value of the corporation's outstanding stock under regulation
prescribed by the commissioner;
                   4.  Any entity
or person which would be a related member under this section if the taxpayer were
considered a corporation for purposes of this section.
          (b)  In computing net income,
a taxpayer shall add back otherwise deductible interest expenses and costs and intangible
expenses and costs directly or indirectly paid, accrued to or incurred, in connection
directly or indirectly with one or more direct or indirect transactions with one
or more related members.
          (c)  The adjustments required
by this subsection shall not apply to such portion of interest expenses and costs
and intangible expenses and costs that the taxpayer can establish meets one (1)
of the following:
              (i)  The related member
directly or indirectly paid, accrued or incurred such portion to a person during
the same income year who is not a related member; or
              (ii)  The transaction
giving rise to the interest expenses and costs or intangible expenses and costs
between the taxpayer and related member was done primarily for a valid business
purpose other than the avoidance of taxes, and the related member is not primarily
engaged in the acquisition, use, maintenance or management, ownership, sale, exchange
or any other disposition of intangible property.
          (d)  Nothing in this subsection
shall require a taxpayer to add to its net income more than once any amount of interest
expenses and costs or intangible expenses and costs that the taxpayer pays, accrues
or incurs to a related member.
          (e)  The commissioner may
prescribe such regulations as necessary or appropriate to carry out the purposes
of this subsection, including, but not limited to, clarifying definitions of terms,
rules of stock attribution, factoring and discount transactions.
     (3)  Individual nonbusiness
deductions.
          (a)  The amount allowable
for individual nonbusiness itemized deductions for federal income tax purposes where
the individual is eligible to elect, for the taxable year, to itemize deductions
on his federal return except the following:
              (i)  The deduction for
state income taxes paid or other taxes allowed for federal purposes in lieu of state
income taxes paid;
              (ii)  The deduction
for gaming losses from gaming establishments;
              (iii)  The deduction
for taxes collected by licensed gaming establishments pursuant to Section
27-7-901;
              (iv)  The deduction
for taxes collected by gaming establishments pursuant to Section 27-7-903 * * *.; and
               (v)  The deduction
for medical expenses for the provision of gender transition procedures as defined
in Section 2 of this act.
          (b)  In lieu of the individual
nonbusiness itemized deductions authorized in paragraph (a), for all purposes other
than ordinary and necessary expenses paid or incurred during the taxable year in
carrying on any trade or business, an optional standard deduction of:
              (i)  Three Thousand
Four Hundred Dollars ($3,400.00) through calendar year 1997, Four Thousand Two Hundred
Dollars ($4,200.00) for the calendar year 1998 and Four Thousand Six Hundred Dollars
($4,600.00) for each calendar year thereafter in the case of married individuals
filing a joint or combined return;
              (ii)  One Thousand Seven
Hundred Dollars ($1,700.00) through calendar year 1997, Two Thousand One Hundred
Dollars ($2,100.00) for the calendar year 1998 and Two Thousand Three Hundred Dollars
($2,300.00) for each calendar year thereafter in the case of married individuals
filing separate returns;
              (iii)  Three Thousand
Four Hundred Dollars ($3,400.00) in the case of a head of family; or
               (iv)  Two Thousand
Three Hundred Dollars ($2,300.00) in the case of an individual who is not married.
     In the case of a husband and
wife living together, having separate incomes, and filing combined returns, the
standard deduction authorized may be divided in any manner they choose.  In the
case of separate returns by a husband and wife, the standard deduction shall not
be allowed to either if the taxable income of one of the spouses is determined without
regard to the standard deduction.
          (c)  A nonresident individual
shall be allowed the same individual nonbusiness deductions as are authorized for
resident individuals in paragraph (a) or (b) of this subsection; however, the nonresident
individual is entitled only to that proportion of the individual nonbusiness deductions
as his net income from sources within the State of Mississippi bears to his total
or entire net income from all sources.
     (4)  Nothing in this section
shall permit the same item to be deducted more than once, either in fact or in effect.
     (5)  Notwithstanding
any other provision in Title 27, Mississippi Code of 1972, there shall be allowed
an income tax deduction for otherwise deductible expenses if:
          (a)  The payment(s) for
such deductible expenses are made with the grant or loan program of the Paycheck
Protection Program as authorized under (i) the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic
Security (CARES) Act and the Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2021, (ii) the COVID-19
Economic Injury Disaster Loan Program, (iii) the 2020 COVID-19 Mississippi Business
Assistance Act, (iv) the Rental Assistance Grant Program, (v) the Shuttered Venue
Operators Grant Program and Restaurant Revitalization Fund authorized by the Economic
Aid to Hard-Hit Small Businesses, Nonprofits, and Venues Act, and amended by the
federal American Rescue Plan Act, and/or (vi) the Mississippi Agriculture Stabilization
Act; and
          (b)  Such deductible expenses
shall be allowed as deductions for federal income tax purposes.
     SECTION 7.  The
following shall be codified as Section 43-13-117.7, Mississippi Code of 1972:
     43-13-117.7.  Notwithstanding
any other provisions of Section 43-13-117, the division
shall not reimburse or provide coverage for gender transition procedures for a person
under eighteen (18) years of age.  As used in this section, the term "gender
transition procedures" means the same as defined in Section 2 of this act.
     SECTION 8.  Section
73-15-29, Mississippi Code of 1972, is amended as follows:
     73-15-29.  (1)  The board shall
have power to revoke, suspend or refuse to renew any license issued by the board,
or to revoke or suspend any privilege to practice, or to deny an application for
a license, or to fine, place on probation and/or discipline a licensee, in any manner
specified in this article, upon proof that such person:
          (a)  Has committed fraud
or deceit in securing or attempting to secure such license;
          (b)  Has been convicted
of a felony, or a crime involving moral turpitude or has had accepted by a court
a plea of nolo contendere to a felony or a crime involving moral turpitude (a certified
copy of the judgment of the court of competent jurisdiction of such conviction or
pleas shall be prima facie evidence of such conviction);
          (c)  Has negligently or
willfully acted in a manner inconsistent with the health or safety of the persons
under the licensee's care;
          (d)  Has had a license or
privilege to practice as a registered nurse or a licensed practical nurse suspended
or revoked in any jurisdiction, has voluntarily surrendered such license or privilege
to practice in any jurisdiction, has been placed on probation as a registered nurse
or licensed practical nurse in any jurisdiction or has been placed under a disciplinary
order(s) in any manner as a registered nurse or licensed practical nurse in any
jurisdiction, (a certified copy of the order of suspension, revocation, probation
or disciplinary action shall be prima facie evidence of such action);
          (e)  Has negligently or
willfully practiced nursing in a manner that fails to meet generally accepted standards
of such nursing practice;
          (f)  Has negligently or
willfully violated any order, rule or regulation of the board pertaining to nursing
practice or licensure;
          (g)  Has falsified or in
a repeatedly negligent manner made incorrect entries or failed to make essential
entries on records;
          (h)  Is addicted to or dependent
on alcohol or other habit-forming drugs or is a habitual user of narcotics, barbiturates,
amphetamines, hallucinogens, or other drugs having similar effect, or has misappropriated
any medication;
          (i)  Has a physical, mental
or emotional condition that renders the licensee unable to perform nursing services
or duties with reasonable skill and safety;
          (j)  Has engaged in any
other conduct, whether of the same or of a different character from that specified
in this article, that would constitute a crime as defined in Title 97 of the Mississippi
Code of 1972, as now or hereafter amended, and that relates to such person's employment
as a registered nurse or licensed practical nurse;
          (k)  Engages in conduct
likely to deceive, defraud or harm the public;
          (l)  Engages in any unprofessional
conduct as identified by the board in its rules;
          (m)  Has violated any provision
of this article; * * *or
          (n)  Violation(s) of the
provisions of Sections 41-121-1 through 41-121-9 relating to deceptive advertisement
by health care practitioners.  This paragraph shall stand repealed on July 1, 2025 * * *.; or
          (o)  Violation(s) of
any provision of Sections 1 through 6 of this act.
     (2)  When the board finds any
person unqualified because of any of the grounds set forth in subsection (1) of
this section, it may enter an order imposing one or more of the following penalties:
          (a)  Denying application
for a license or other authorization to practice nursing or practical nursing;
          (b)  Administering a reprimand;
          (c)  Suspending or restricting
the license or other authorization to practice as a registered nurse or licensed
practical nurse for up to two (2) years without review;
          (d)  Revoking the license
or other authorization to practice nursing or practical nursing;
          (e)  Requiring the disciplinee
to submit to care, counseling or treatment by persons and/or agencies approved or
designated by the board as a condition for initial, continued or renewed licensure
or other authorization to practice nursing or practical nursing;
          (f)  Requiring the disciplinee
to participate in a program of education prescribed by the board as a condition
for initial, continued or renewed licensure or other authorization to practice;
          (g)  Requiring the disciplinee
to practice under the supervision of a registered nurse for a specified period of
time; or
          (h)  Imposing a fine not
to exceed Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00).
     (3)  In addition to the grounds
specified in subsection (1) of this section, the board shall be authorized to suspend
the license or privilege to practice of any licensee for being out of compliance
with an order for support, as defined in Section 93-11-153.  The procedure for suspension
of a license or privilege to practice for being out of compliance with an order
for support, and the procedure for the reissuance or reinstatement of a license
or privilege to practice suspended for that purpose, and the payment of any fees
for the reissuance or reinstatement of a license or privilege to practice suspended
for that purpose, shall be governed by Section 93-11-157 or 93-11-163, as the case
may be.  If there is any conflict between any provision of Section 93-11-157 or
93-11-163 and any provision of this article, the provisions of Section 93-11-157
or 93-11-163, as the case may be, shall control.
     (4)  If the public health, safety
or welfare imperatively requires emergency action and the board incorporates a finding
to that effect in an order, the board may order summary suspension of a license
pending proceedings for revocation or other action.  These proceedings shall be
promptly instituted and determined by the board.
     (5)  The board may establish
by rule an alternative to discipline program for licensees who have an impairment
as a result of substance abuse or a mental health condition, which program shall
include at least the following components:
          (a)  Participation in the
program is voluntary with the licensee, and the licensee must enter the program
before the board holds a disciplinary action hearing regarding the licensee;
          (b)  The full cost of participation
in the program, including the cost of any care, counseling, treatment and/or education
received by the licensee, shall be borne by the licensee;
          (c)  All of the procedures
and records regarding the licensee's participation in the program shall be confidential,
shall not be disclosed and shall be exempt from the provisions of the Mississippi
Public Records Act of 1983; and
          (d)  A licensee may not
participate in the program more often than one (1) time during any period of five
(5) years or such longer period as set by the board.
     (6)  A nurse practitioner who
provides a written certification as authorized under the Mississippi Medical Cannabis
Act and in compliance with rules and regulations adopted thereunder shall not be
subject to any disciplinary action under this section solely due to providing the
written certification.
     SECTION 9.  Section
73-25-29, Mississippi Code of 1972, is amended as follows:
     73-25-29.  The grounds for the
nonissuance, suspension, revocation or restriction of a license or the denial of
reinstatement or renewal of a license are:
          (1)  Habitual personal use
of narcotic drugs, or any other drug having addiction-forming or addiction-sustaining
liability.
          (2)  Habitual use of intoxicating
liquors, or any beverage, to an extent which affects professional competency.
          (3)  Administering, dispensing
or prescribing any narcotic drug, or any other drug having addiction-forming or
addiction-sustaining liability otherwise than in the course of legitimate professional
practice.
          (4)  Conviction of violation
of any federal or state law regulating the possession, distribution or use of any
narcotic drug or any drug considered a controlled substance under state or federal
law, a certified copy of the conviction order or judgment rendered by the trial
court being prima facie evidence thereof, notwithstanding the pendency of any appeal.
          (5)  Procuring, or attempting
to procure, or aiding in, an abortion that is not medically indicated.
          (6)  Conviction of a felony
or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, a certified copy of the conviction order
or judgment rendered by the trial court being prima facie evidence thereof, notwithstanding
the pendency of any appeal.
          (7)  Obtaining or attempting
to obtain a license by fraud or deception.
          (8)  Unprofessional conduct,
which includes, but is not limited to:
              (a)  Practicing medicine
under a false or assumed name or impersonating another practitioner, living or dead.
              (b)  Knowingly performing
any act which in any way assists an unlicensed person to practice medicine.
               (c)  Making or willfully
causing to be made any flamboyant claims concerning the licensee's professional
excellence.
              (d)  Being guilty of
any dishonorable or unethical conduct likely to deceive, defraud or harm the public.
              (e)  Obtaining a fee
as personal compensation or gain from a person on fraudulent representation of a
disease or injury condition generally considered incurable by competent medical
authority in the light of current scientific knowledge and practice can be cured
or offering, undertaking, attempting or agreeing to cure or treat the same by a
secret method, which he refuses to divulge to the board upon request.
              (f)  Use of any false,
fraudulent or forged statement or document, or the use of any fraudulent, deceitful,
dishonest or immoral practice in connection with any of the licensing requirements,
including the signing in his professional capacity any certificate that is known
to be false at the time he makes or signs such certificate.
              (g)  Failing to identify
a physician's school of practice in all professional uses of his name by use of
his earned degree or a description of his school of practice.
          (9)  The refusal of a licensing
authority of another state or jurisdiction to issue or renew a license, permit or
certificate to practice medicine in that jurisdiction or the revocation, suspension
or other restriction imposed on a license, permit or certificate issued by such
licensing authority which prevents or restricts practice in that jurisdiction, a
certified copy of the disciplinary order or action taken by the other state or jurisdiction
being prima facie evidence thereof, notwithstanding the pendency of any appeal.
          (10)  Surrender of a license
or authorization to practice medicine in another state or jurisdiction or surrender
of membership on any medical staff or in any medical or professional association
or society while under disciplinary investigation by any of those authorities or
bodies for acts or conduct similar to acts or conduct which would constitute grounds
for action as defined in this section.
          (11)  Final sanctions imposed
by the United States Department of Health and Human Services, Office of Inspector
General or any successor federal agency or office, based upon a finding of incompetency,
gross misconduct or failure to meet professionally recognized standards of health
care; a certified copy of the notice of final sanction being prima facie evidence
thereof.  As used in this paragraph, the term "final sanction" means the
written notice to a physician from the United States Department of Health and Human
Services, Officer of Inspector General or any successor federal agency or office,
which implements the exclusion.
          (12)  Failure to furnish
the board, its investigators or representatives information legally requested by
the board.
          (13)  Violation of any provision(s)
of the Medical Practice Act or the rules and regulations of the board or of any
order, stipulation or agreement with the board.
          (14)  Violation(s) of the
provisions of Sections 41-121-1 through 41-121-9 relating to deceptive advertisement
by health care practitioners.
          (15)  Performing or inducing
an abortion on a woman in violation of any provision of Sections 41-41-131 through
41-41-145.
          (16)  Performing an abortion
on a pregnant woman after determining that the unborn human individual that the
pregnant woman is carrying has a detectable fetal heartbeat as provided in Section
41-41-34.1.
          (17)  Violation(s) of
any provision of Sections 1 through 6 of this act.
     In addition to the grounds specified
above, the board shall be authorized to suspend the license of any licensee for
being out of compliance with an order for support, as defined in Section 93-11-153. 
The procedure for suspension of a license for being out of compliance with an order
for support, and the procedure for the reissuance or reinstatement of a license
suspended for that purpose, and the payment of any fees for the reissuance or reinstatement
of a license suspended for that purpose, shall be governed by Section 93-11-157
or 93-11-163, as the case may be.  If there is any conflict between any provision
of Section 93-11-157 or 93-11-163 and any provision of this chapter, the provisions
of Section 93-11-157 or 93-11-163, as the case may be, shall control. 
     A physician who provides a written
certification as authorized under the Mississippi Medical Cannabis Act and in compliance
with rules and regulations adopted thereunder shall not be subject to any disciplinary
action under this section solely due to providing the written certification.
     SECTION 10.  Section
73-25-33, Mississippi Code of 1972, is amended as follows:
     73-25-33.  (1)  The
practice of medicine shall mean to suggest, recommend, prescribe, or direct for
the use of any person, any drug, medicine, appliance, or other agency, whether material
or not material, for the cure, relief, or palliation of any ailment or disease
of the mind or body, or for the cure or relief of any wound or fracture or
other bodily injury or deformity, or the practice of obstetrics or midwifery,
after having received, or with the intent of receiving therefor, either
directly or indirectly, any bonus, gift, profit or compensation; provided, that
nothing in this section shall apply to females engaged solely in the practice of
midwifery.
     (2)  The practice of medicine
shall not mean to provide gender transition procedures for any person under eighteen
(18) years of age; or
     (3)  For purposes of this
section, "gender transition procedures" means the same as defined in Section
2 of this act.
     SECTION 11.  Section
83-9-22, Mississippi Code of 1972, is amended as follows:
     83-9-22.  (1)  (a)  Notwithstanding
any other provision of the law to the contrary, except as otherwise provided in
subsections (3) and (4) of this section, no health coverage plan shall
restrict coverage for medically appropriate treatment prescribed by a physician
and agreed to by a fully informed insured, or if the insured lacks legal capacity
to consent by a person who has legal authority to consent on his or her behalf,
based on an insured's diagnosis with a terminal condition.  Refusing to pay for
treatment rendered to an insured near the end of life that is consistent with best
practices for treatment of a disease or condition, approved uses of a drug or device,
or uses supported by peer reviewed medical literature, is a per se violation of
this section.
          (b)  Violations of this
section shall constitute an unfair trade practice and subject the violator to the
penalties provided by law.
          (c)  As used in this section
"terminal condition" means any aggressive malignancy, chronic end-stage
cardiovascular or cerebral vascular disease, or any other disease, illness or condition
which a physician diagnoses as terminal.
          (d)  As used in this section,
a "health coverage plan" shall mean any hospital, health or medical expense
insurance policy, hospital or medical service contract, employee welfare benefit
plan, contract or agreement with a health maintenance organization or a preferred
provider organization, health and accident insurance policy, or any other insurance
contract of this type, including a group insurance plan and the State Health and
Life Insurance Plan.
     (2)  (a)  Notwithstanding any
other provision of the law to the contrary, no health benefit paid directly or indirectly
with state funds, specifically Medicaid, shall restrict coverage for medically appropriate
treatment prescribed by a physician and agreed to by a fully informed individual,
or if the individual lacks legal capacity to consent by a person who has legal authority
to consent on his or her behalf, based on an individual's diagnosis with a terminal
condition.
          (b)  Refusing to pay for
treatment rendered to an individual near the end of life that is consistent with
best practices for treatment of a disease or condition, approved uses of a drug
or device, or uses supported by peer reviewed medical literature, is a per se violation
of this section.
          (c)  As used in this section
"terminal condition" means any aggressive malignancy, chronic end-stage
cardiovascular or cerebral vascular disease, or any other disease, illness or condition
which a physician diagnoses as terminal. 
     (3)  This section does not require
a health coverage plan to cover and pay for the treatment of a person who is a cardholder
and registered qualifying patient with medical cannabis that is lawful under the
Mississippi Medical Cannabis Act and in compliance with rules and regulations adopted
thereunder.
     (4)  This section does not
require a health coverage plan to provide coverage for gender transition
procedures for a person under eighteen (18) years of age.  As used in this
section, the term "gender transition procedures" means the same as
defined in Section 2 of this act.
     SECTION 12.  The
following shall be codified as Section 83-9-37, Mississippi Code of 1972:
     83-9-37.  (1)  As used in this section, the term "gender transition
procedures" means the same as defined in Section 2 of this act.
     (2)  A
health benefit plan under an insurance policy or other plan providing health care
coverage in this state shall not include reimbursement for gender transition procedures
for a person under eighteen (18) years of age.
     (3)  A health benefit plan
under an insurance policy or other plan providing health care coverage in this
state is not required to provide coverage for gender transition procedures for
a person under eighteen (18) years of age.
     SECTION 13.  Section
11-46-5, Mississippi Code of 1972, is amended as follows:
     11-46-5.  (1) 
Notwithstanding the immunity granted in Section 11-46-3, or the provisions of
any other law to the contrary, the immunity of the state and its political
subdivisions from claims for money damages arising out of the torts of such
governmental entities and the torts of their employees while acting within the
course and scope of their employment is hereby waived from and after July 1,
1993, as to the state, and from and after October 1, 1993, as to political
subdivisions; provided, however, immunity of a governmental entity in any such
case shall be waived only to the extent of the maximum amount of liability
provided for in Section 11-46-15.
     (2)  For the purposes of
this chapter an employee shall not be considered as acting within the course and
scope of his employment and a governmental entity shall not be liable or be
considered to have waived immunity for any conduct of its employee if the
employee's conduct constituted fraud, malice, libel, slander, defamation or any
criminal offense other than traffic violations.
     (3)  For the purposes of
this chapter and not otherwise, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that any
act or omission of an employee within the time and at the place of his
employment is within the course and scope of his employment, except for actions
described in subsection (2) of Section 73-25-33 and subsection (5) of this section.
     (4)  Nothing contained in
this chapter shall be construed to waive the immunity of the state from suit in
federal courts guaranteed by the Eleventh Amendment to the Constitution of the
United States.
     (5)  For purposes of this
chapter, an employee shall not be considered as acting within the course and
scope of his or her employment and a governmental entity shall be liable or be considered
to have waived immunity for any conduct of its employee if the employee's
conduct constituted a violation of this act.
     SECTION 14.  Section
41-41-219, Mississippi Code of 1972, is amended as follows:
     41-41-219.  (1)  Except as
otherwise provided in this act, a health-care provider or institution
acting in good faith and in accordance with generally accepted health-care
standards applicable to the health-care provider or institution is not subject
to civil or criminal liability or to discipline for unprofessional conduct for:
          (a)  Complying with a
health-care decision of a person apparently having authority to make a health-care
decision for a patient, including a decision to withhold or withdraw health care;
          (b)  Declining to comply
with a health-care decision of a person based on a belief that the person then
lacked authority; or
          (c)  Complying with an
advance health-care directive and  assuming that the directive was valid when
made and has not been revoked or terminated.
     (2)  An individual acting as
agent or surrogate under Sections 41-41-201 through 41-41-229 is not subject to
civil or criminal liability or to discipline for unprofessional conduct for
health-care decisions made in good faith.
     SECTION 15.  If any
section, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase or any part of this act passed on
or after the effective date of this act is declared to be unconstitutional or
void, or if for any reason is declared to be invalid or of no effect, the remaining
sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, phrases or parts of this act shall be
in no manner affected thereby but shall remain in full force and effect.
     Unless the contrary intent
shall clearly appear in the particular act in question, each and every act
passed hereafter shall be read and construed as though the provisions of the
first paragraph of this section form an integral part thereof, whether
expressly set out therein or not.
     SECTION 16.  This act
shall take effect and be in force from and after its passage.




