


 
88R9763 CXP-D


 


 

		By: Schaefer
H.B. No. 2722




 


 



 		
			

A BILL TO BE ENTITLED




 
			

AN ACT




 
			
relating to a public school policy regarding multi-occupancy 



 
			
bathrooms or changing facilities.



 
			
       BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF TEXAS:



 
			
       SECTION 1.  Subchapter A, Chapter 38, Education Code, is 



 
			
amended by adding Section 38.044 to read as follows:



 
			
       Sec. 38.044.  POLICY REGARDING MULTI-OCCUPANCY BATHROOM OR 



 
			
CHANGING FACILITY.  (a)  In this section, "multi-occupancy bathroom 



 
			
or changing facility" means a facility designed or designated for 



 
			
use by more than one person at a time, where a person may be in a 



 
			
state of undress in the presence of another person, regardless of 



 
			
whether the facility provides curtains or partial walls for 



 
			
privacy.  The term includes a restroom, locker room, changing room, 



 
			
or shower room.



 
			
       (b)  A school district shall ensure that any policy adopted 



 
			
by the district regarding multi-occupancy bathrooms or changing 



 
			
facilities protects:



 
			
             (1)  the health, safety, and welfare of students;



 
			
             (2)  the confidentiality of student educational 



 
			
information as required under state and federal law, including the 



 
			
Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act of 1974 (20 U.S.C. 



 
			
Section 1232g); and



 
			
             (3)  the privacy interests of all students and the 



 
			
students' parents.



 
			
       (c)  If a school district adopts a policy that allows for 



 
			
separation of multi-occupancy bathrooms or changing facilities 



 
			
according to a criterion other than a person's biological sex 



 
			
assigned at birth, the policy must:



 
			
             (1)  include:



 
			
                   (A)  a description of:



 
			
                         (i)  which multi-occupancy bathrooms or 



 
			
changing facilities are not separated by biological sex assigned at 



 
			
birth; and



 
			
                         (ii)  if a multi-occupancy bathroom or 



 
			
changing facility is not separated by biological sex assigned at 



 
			
birth, the method by which students will be supervised in that 



 
			
facility and the manner in which that method of supervision ensures 



 
			
the safety and privacy of students; and



 
			
                   (B)  accommodations or modifications for students 



 
			
who wish to use a multi-occupancy bathroom or changing facility 



 
			
separated by biological sex assigned at birth; and



 
			
             (2)  be:



 
			
                   (A)  posted on the district's Internet website; 



 
			
and



 
			
                   (B)  provided at the beginning of each school year 



 
			
by mail to each parent of a student enrolled in the district.



 
			
       (d)  The requirements under Subsection (c) do not apply to a 



 
			
faculty bathroom that is not accessible to students.



 
			
       SECTION 2.  This Act applies beginning with the 2023-2024 



 
			
school year.



 
			
       SECTION 3.  This Act takes effect immediately if it receives 



 
			
a vote of two-thirds of all the members elected to each house, as 



 
			
provided by Section 39, Article III, Texas Constitution.  If this 



 
			
Act does not receive the vote necessary for immediate effect, this 



 
			
Act takes effect September 1, 2023.


