


 
88R3483 EAS-D


 


 

		By: Hall, Campbell, Perry
S.B. No. 250




 


 



 		
			

A BILL TO BE ENTITLED




 
			

AN ACT




 
			
relating to the provision of and professional liability insurance 



 
			
coverage for gender transitioning or gender reassignment medical 



 
			
procedures and treatments for certain children.



 
			
       BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF TEXAS:



 
			
       SECTION 1.  Chapter 161, Health and Safety Code, is amended 



 
			
by adding Subchapter X to read as follows:



 
			
SUBCHAPTER X.  GENDER TRANSITIONING AND GENDER REASSIGNMENT 



 
			
PROCEDURES AND TREATMENTS FOR CERTAIN CHILDREN



 
			
       Sec. 161.701.  DEFINITIONS.  In this subchapter:



 
			
             (1)  "Child" means an individual who is younger than 18 



 
			
years of age.



 
			
             (2)  "Health care provider" means a person other than a 



 
			
physician who is licensed, certified, or otherwise authorized by 



 
			
this state's laws to provide or render health care or to dispense or 



 
			
prescribe a prescription drug in the ordinary course of business or 



 
			
practice of a profession.



 
			
             (3)  "Physician" means a person licensed to practice 



 
			
medicine in this state.



 
			
       Sec. 161.702.  PROHIBITED PROVISION OF GENDER TRANSITIONING 



 
			
OR GENDER REASSIGNMENT PROCEDURES AND TREATMENTS TO CERTAIN 



 
			
CHILDREN.  For the purpose of transitioning a child's biological 



 
			
sex as determined by the sex organs, chromosomes, and endogenous 



 
			
profiles of the child or affirming the child's perception of the 



 
			
child's sex if that perception is inconsistent with the child's 



 
			
biological sex, a physician or health care provider may not:



 
			
             (1)  perform a surgery that sterilizes the child, 



 
			
including:



 
			
                   (A)  castration;



 
			
                   (B)  vasectomy;



 
			
                   (C)  hysterectomy;



 
			
                   (D)  oophorectomy;



 
			
                   (E)  metoidioplasty;



 
			
                   (F)  orchiectomy;



 
			
                   (G)  penectomy;



 
			
                   (H)  phalloplasty; and



 
			
                   (I)  vaginoplasty;



 
			
             (2)  perform a mastectomy;



 
			
             (3)  prescribe, administer, or supply any of the 



 
			
following medications that induce transient or permanent 



 
			
infertility:



 
			
                   (A)  puberty-blocking medication to stop or delay 



 
			
normal puberty;



 
			
                   (B)  supraphysiologic doses of testosterone to 



 
			
females; or



 
			
                   (C)  supraphysiologic doses of estrogen to males; 



 
			
or



 
			
             (4)  remove any otherwise healthy or non-diseased body 



 
			
part or tissue.



 
			
       Sec. 161.703.  EXCEPTIONS.  Section 161.702 does not apply 



 
			
to the provision by a physician or health care provider, with the 



 
			
consent of the child's parent or legal guardian, of appropriate and 



 
			
medically necessary gender transitioning or gender reassignment 



 
			
procedures or treatments to a child who:



 
			
             (1)  is born with a medically verifiable genetic 



 
			
disorder of sex development, including:



 
			
                   (A)  46,XX chromosomes with virilization;



 
			
                   (B)  46,XY chromosomes with undervirilization; or



 
			
                   (C)  both ovarian and testicular tissue; or



 
			
             (2)  does not have the normal sex chromosome structure 



 
			
for male or female as determined by a physician through genetic 



 
			
testing.



 
			
       Sec. 161.704.  DISCIPLINARY ACTION.  The Texas Medical Board 



 
			
or another state regulatory agency with jurisdiction over a health 



 
			
care provider subject to Section 161.702 shall revoke the license, 



 
			
certification, or authorization of a physician or health care 



 
			
provider who the board or agency determines has violated that 



 
			
section.



 
			
       SECTION 2.  Subchapter F, Chapter 1901, Insurance Code, is 



 
			
amended by adding Section 1901.256 to read as follows:



 
			
       Sec. 1901.256.  PROHIBITED COVERAGE FOR PROVISION OF CERTAIN 



 
			
GENDER-RELATED PROCEDURES AND TREATMENTS TO CERTAIN CHILDREN.  A 



 
			
professional liability insurance policy issued to a physician or 



 
			
health care provider may not include coverage for damages assessed 



 
			
against the physician or health care provider who provides to a 



 
			
child gender transitioning or gender reassignment procedures or 



 
			
treatments that are prohibited by Section 161.702, Health and 



 
			
Safety Code.



 
			
       SECTION 3.  Section 1901.256, Insurance Code, as added by 



 
			
this Act, applies only to a medical professional liability 



 
			
insurance policy that is delivered, issued for delivery, or renewed 



 
			
on or after the effective date of this Act.  An insurance policy 



 
			
that is delivered, issued for delivery, or renewed before the 



 
			
effective date of this Act is governed by the law in effect 



 
			
immediately before the effective date of this Act, and that law is 



 
			
continued in effect for that purpose.



 
			
       SECTION 4.  This Act takes effect immediately if it receives 



 
			
a vote of two-thirds of all the members elected to each house, as 



 
			
provided by Section 39, Article III, Texas Constitution.  If this 



 
			
Act does not receive the vote necessary for immediate effect, this 



 
			
Act takes effect September 1, 2023.


