
<![endif]-->




THE SENATE


S.B. NO.


1428




THIRTY-SECOND LEGISLATURE, 2023


 




STATE OF HAWAII


 




 


 




 




 
 



A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
relating
to parental rights in education.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 




     SECTION
1.  Chapter
302A, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new section to be
properly designated and to read as follows:
     "§302A-     Student
welfare.  (a)  The board shall adopt procedures for notifying
a student's parent if there is a change in the student's services or monitoring
related to the student's mental, emotional, or physical health or well-being
and the school's ability to provide a safe and supportive learning environment
for the student.  The procedures shall reinforce
the fundamental right of parents to make decisions regarding the upbringing and
control of their children by requiring school personnel to encourage a student
to discuss issues relating to the student's well-being with the student's parent
or to facilitate discussion of the issue with the parent.  The procedures shall not prohibit parents from
accessing any of their student's education and health records created,
maintained, or used by the department.
     (b)  The board shall not adopt procedures or
student support forms that prohibit school personnel from notifying a parent
about the student's mental, emotional, or physical health or well-being, or a
change in related services or monitoring, or that encourage or have the effect
of encouraging a student to withhold from a parent such information.  School personnel shall not discourage or
prohibit parental notification of and involvement in critical decisions
affecting a student's mental, emotional, or physical health or well-being.  This subsection does not prohibit the
department from adopting procedures that permit school personnel to withhold
information from a parent if a reasonably prudent person would believe that
disclosure would result in abuse, abandonment, or neglect.
     (c)  Classroom instruction
by school personnel or third parties on sexual orientation or gender identity shall
not occur in kindergarten through grade three or in a manner that is not age
appropriate or developmentally appropriate for students in accordance with
state standards.
     (d)  Student support
services training developed or provided by the department to school personnel shall
adhere to student services guidelines, standards, and frameworks established by
the department.
     (e)  At the beginning of the
school year, the department shall notify parents of each healthcare service
offered at their student's school and the option to withhold consent or decline
any specific service.  Parental consent
to a health care service does not waive the parent's right to access the student's
educational or health records or to be notified about a change in the student's
services or monitoring as provided by this subsection.
     (f)  Before administering a student well-being
questionnaire or health screening form to a student in kindergarten through
grade three, the department shall provide the questionnaire or health screening
form to the parent and obtain the permission of the parent.
     (g)  The board shall adopt procedures for a parent
to notify the principal, or the principal's designee, regarding concerns under
this section at the student's school and the process for resolving those
concerns within seven calendar days after notification by the parent.  The procedures shall require that within
thirty days after notification by the parent that the concern remains
unresolved, the department shall either resolve the concern or provide a
statement of the reasons for not resolving the concern:
     (1)  If a concern is
not resolved by the department, a parent may:
          (A)  Request
the superintendent to appoint a special master who is an attorney licensed to
practice in the State and who has at least five years' experience in
administrative law.  The special master shall
determine facts relating to the dispute over the departmental procedure or
practice, consider information provided by the department and render a
recommended decision for resolution to the board within thirty days after
receipt of the request by the parent.  The
board shall approve or reject the recommended decision at its next regularly
scheduled meeting that is more than seven calendar days and no more than thirty
days after the date the recommended decision is transmitted.  The costs of the special master shall be borne
by the department.  The board shall adopt
rules, including forms, necessary to implement this subparagraph; or
          (B)  Bring
an action against the department to obtain a declaratory judgment that the
department procedure or practice violates this subsection and seek injunctive
relief.  A court may award damages and
shall award reasonable attorney fees and court costs to a parent who receives
declaratory or injunctive relief;
     (2)  The board shall
adopt policies to notify parents of the procedures required under this subsection;
and
     (3)  Nothing
contained in this subsection shall be construed to abridge or alter rights of
action or remedies in equity already existing under the common or general law."
     SECTION
2.  By June 30, 2024, the department of education shall review and update, as
necessary, school counseling frameworks and standards; educator practices and
professional conduct principles; and any other student services personnel
guidelines, standards, or frameworks in accordance with the requirements of
this Act.
     SECTION 3.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 4.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2023.
 



INTRODUCED BY:


_____________________________




 


 








 
Report Title:
Parental Rights
in Education
 
Description:
Bans
instruction related to sexual orientation and gender identity in public
schools.  Establishes new parental rights
regarding health services and records.  Establishes
the parental right to sue and receive damages if schools fail to adhere to new
provisions.
 
 
 
The summary description
of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is
not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.

