


 
88R10711 SCL-D


 


 

		By: Hall
S.B. No. 1029




 


 



 		
			

A BILL TO BE ENTITLED




 
			

AN ACT




 
			
relating to civil liability for, governmental health plan coverage 



 
			
of, and public funding for gender modification procedures and 



 
			
treatments.



 
			
       BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF TEXAS:



 
			
       SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that:



 
			
             (1)  as evidenced by a 2018 video of a Vanderbilt 



 
			
University Medical Center administrator who promoted gender 



 
			
modification surgeries as financially beneficial and stated that 



 
			
entire clinics are being financed by phalloplasties, the medical 



 
			
community has knowledge that many so-called "gender affirming" 



 
			
treatments are not in the best interest of the health of the patient 



 
			
but rather are being promoted for the monetary gain the health care 



 
			
facilities will receive from providing those treatments; and



 
			
             (2)  the medical community has a conflict of interest 



 
			
in offering gender modification treatments and procedures because 



 
			
those treatments and procedures create lifelong patients as a 



 
			
result of required follow-up visits after those treatments and 



 
			
procedures.



 
			
       SECTION 2.  Title 4, Civil Practice and Remedies Code, is 



 
			
amended by adding Chapter 74B to read as follows:



 
			
CHAPTER 74B. LIABILITY FOR GENDER MODIFICATION PROCEDURES AND 



 
			
TREATMENTS



 
			
       Sec. 74B.001.  DEFINITION.  In this chapter, "gender 



 
			
modification procedure or treatment" means a health care procedure 



 
			
or treatment provided for the purpose of transitioning a patient's 



 
			
biological sex, as determined by the patient's sex organs, 



 
			
chromosomes, and endogenous profiles, or affirming the patient's 



 
			
perception of the patient's sex if that perception is inconsistent 



 
			
with the patient's sex.  The term includes:



 
			
             (1)  a surgery that sterilizes the patient, including:



 
			
                   (A)  castration;



 
			
                   (B)  vasectomy;



 
			
                   (C)  hysterectomy;



 
			
                   (D)  oophorectomy;



 
			
                   (E)  metoidioplasty;



 
			
                   (F)  orchiectomy;



 
			
                   (G)  penectomy;



 
			
                   (H)  phalloplasty; and



 
			
                   (I)  vaginoplasty;



 
			
             (2)  a mastectomy;



 
			
             (3)  the prescription, administration, or supply of any 



 
			
of the following medications that induce transient or permanent 



 
			
infertility:



 
			
                   (A)  puberty-blocking medication to stop or delay 



 
			
normal puberty;



 
			
                   (B)  supraphysiologic doses of testosterone to 



 
			
females; or



 
			
                   (C)  supraphysiologic doses of estrogen to males; 



 
			
and



 
			
             (4)  the removal of any otherwise healthy or 



 
			
non-diseased body part or tissue.



 
			
       Sec. 74B.002.  CONFLICT OF LAWS.  To the extent this chapter 



 
			
conflicts with another law, this chapter prevails.



 
			
       Sec. 74B.003.  STRICT LIABILITY FOR HEALTH COVERAGE.  A 



 
			
health benefit plan issuer is strictly liable to a patient for the 



 
			
patient's medical, mental health, and pharmaceutical costs, 



 
			
including costs associated with reversing a gender modification 



 
			
procedure or treatment, incurred for the life of the patient as a 



 
			
result of a gender modification procedure or treatment covered by 



 
			
the issuer's plan.



 
			
       Sec. 74B.004.  LIABILITY FOR PHYSICIAN OR HEALTH CARE 



 
			
PROVIDER.  A physician or health care provider who provides a gender 



 
			
modification procedure or treatment to a patient is:



 
			
             (1)  liable to the patient for a malpractice claim in 



 
			
the provision of the procedure or treatment; and



 
			
             (2)  strictly liable to the patient for the patient's 



 
			
medical, mental health, and pharmaceutical costs, including costs 



 
			
associated with reversing a gender modification procedure or 



 
			
treatment, incurred for the life of the patient as a result of the 



 
			
procedure or treatment.



 
			
       Sec. 74B.005.  EXCEPTIONS.  Sections 74B.003 and 74B.004 do 



 
			
not apply to the provision by a physician or health care provider, 



 
			
with the consent of a child's parent or legal guardian, if 



 
			
applicable, and the coverage by a health benefit plan of 



 
			
appropriate and medically necessary gender modification procedures 



 
			
or treatments to a patient who:



 
			
             (1)  is born with a medically verifiable genetic 



 
			
disorder of sex development, including:



 
			
                   (A)  46,XX chromosomes with virilization;



 
			
                   (B)  46,XY chromosomes with undervirilization; or



 
			
                   (C)  both ovarian and testicular tissue; or



 
			
             (2)  does not have the normal sex chromosome structure 



 
			
for male or female as determined by a physician through genetic 



 
			
testing.



 
			
       SECTION 3.  Subtitle F, Title 10, Government Code, is 



 
			
amended by adding Chapter 2273A to read as follows:



 
			
CHAPTER 2273A. PROHIBITED USES OF PUBLIC MONEY



 
			
       Sec. 2273A.001.  DEFINITIONS.  In this chapter:



 
			
             (1)  "Gender modification procedure or treatment" has 



 
			
the meaning assigned by Section 74B.001, Civil Practice and 



 
			
Remedies Code.



 
			
             (2)  "Governmental entity" means this state, a state 



 
			
agency, or a political subdivision.



 
			
       Sec. 2273A.002.  USE FOR GENDER MODIFICATION PROCEDURE OR 



 
			
TREATMENT.  A governmental entity may not use or provide public 



 
			
money for the provision or administration of a gender modification 



 
			
procedure or treatment.



 
			
       SECTION 4.  Subtitle E, Title 8, Insurance Code, is amended 



 
			
by adding Chapter 1372 to read as follows:



 
			
CHAPTER 1372. PROHIBITED COVERAGE OF GENDER MODIFICATION 



 
			
PROCEDURES AND TREATMENTS



 
			
       Sec. 1372.001.  DEFINITION.  In this chapter, "gender 



 
			
modification procedure or treatment" has the meaning assigned by 



 
			
Section 74B.001, Civil Practice and Remedies Code.



 
			
       Sec. 1372.002.  APPLICABILITY OF CHAPTER.  Notwithstanding 



 
			
any other law, this chapter applies only to:



 
			
             (1)  a basic coverage plan under Chapter 1551;



 
			
             (2)  a basic plan under Chapter 1575;



 
			
             (3)  a primary care coverage plan under Chapter 1579;



 
			
             (4)  a plan providing basic coverage under Chapter 



 
			
1601;



 
			
             (5)  the state Medicaid program, including the Medicaid 



 
			
managed care program operated under Chapter 533, Government Code; 



 
			
and



 
			
             (6)  the child health plan program under Chapter 62, 



 
			
Health and Safety Code.



 
			
       Sec. 1372.003.  PROHIBITED COVERAGE; EXCEPTION.  (a)  A 



 
			
health benefit plan may not provide coverage for a gender 



 
			
modification procedure or treatment.



 
			
       (b)  This section does not apply to the coverage by a health 



 
			
benefit plan of appropriate and medically necessary gender 



 
			
modification procedures or treatments to a patient who:



 
			
             (1)  is born with a medically verifiable genetic 



 
			
disorder of sex development, including:



 
			
                   (A)  46,XX chromosomes with virilization;



 
			
                   (B)  46,XY chromosomes with undervirilization; or



 
			
                   (C)  both ovarian and testicular tissue; or



 
			
             (2)  does not have the normal sex chromosome structure 



 
			
for male or female as determined by a physician through genetic 



 
			
testing.



 
			
       SECTION 5.  (a)  Chapter 74B, Civil Practice and Remedies 



 
			
Code, as added by this Act, applies only to a cause of action that 



 
			
accrues on or after the effective date of this Act.



 
			
       (b)  The changes in law made by this Act apply only to a 



 
			
health benefit plan delivered, issued for delivery, or renewed on 



 
			
or after the effective date of this Act.



 
			
       SECTION 6.  This Act takes effect September 1, 2023.


