


 



 


 

		By: Harrison
H.B. No. 1029




 


 



 		
			

A BILL TO BE ENTITLED




 
			

AN ACT




 
			
relating to a prohibition on funding for gender reassignment.



 
			
       BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF TEXAS:



 
			
       SECTION 1.  Subtitle F, Title 10, Government Code, is 



 
			
amended by adding Chapter 2275 to read as follows:



 
			
Chapter 2275. Prohibition on Use of Taxpayer Resources



 
			
       Sec. 2275.001.  DEFINITIONS.  In this chapter:



 
			
             (1)  "Gender reassignment" means a medical 



 
			
intervention, including surgery performed for the purpose of 



 
			
altering a person's primary or secondary sex characteristics or 



 
			
drugs or biologicals prescribed for the purpose of altering or 



 
			
maintaining alteration of a person's primary or secondary sex 



 
			
characteristics.



 
			
             (2)  "Intersex person" means an person who:



 
			
                   (A)  has inborn chromosomal, gonadal, genital, or 



 
			
endocrine characteristics, or a combination of those 



 
			
characteristics, that are not suited to the typical definition of 



 
			
male or female or are atypical for the determined sex of the person; 



 
			
or



 
			
                   (B)  is considered by a medical professional to 



 
			
have inborn chromosomal, gonadal, genital, or endocrine 



 
			
characteristics that are ambiguous or atypical for the determined 



 
			
sex of the person.



 
			
       Sec. 2275.002.  PROHIBITION ON USE OF TAXPAYER RESOURCES FOR 



 
			
GENDER REASSIGNMENT.  (a)  No funds authorized or appropriated by 



 
			
State law shall be expended for any gender reassignment.



 
			
       (b)  No funds authorized or appropriated by State law shall 



 
			
be expended for health benefits that covers gender reassignment.



 
			
       (c)  The prohibition in subsection (a) and (b) does not apply 



 
			
to gender reassignment to be performed on an intersex person.



 
			
       SECTION 2.  This Act takes effect immediately if it receives 



 
			
a vote of two-thirds of all the members elected to each house, as 



 
			
provided by Section 39, Article III, Texas Constitution.  If this 



 
			
Act does not receive the vote necessary for immediate effect, this 



 
			
Act takes effect September 1, 2023.


