

 
 
PREFILED JAN 06 2023



REFERENCE TITLE: drag performers; drag
  shows; regulation




 
 
 
 
State of
  Arizona
Senate
Fifty-sixth
  Legislature
First Regular
  Session
2023
 
 
 




SB 1030




 




Introduced by 
Senator Kern
 



 
 
 
 
 
 
An Act
 
amending sections
11-811, 12-741, 13-1422 and 13-1425, Arizona Revised
Statutes; relating to adult oriented businesses.
 
 
(TEXT OF BILL BEGINS ON NEXT PAGE)
 




Be it enacted by the Legislature of the State of Arizona:
Section 1. Section 11-811, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:
START_STATUTE11-811. Zoning ordinance; zoning districts; definitions
A. Pursuant to this article, the board of
supervisors may shall adopt a zoning
ordinance in order to conserve and promote the public health, safety,
convenience and general welfare. The zoning ordinance and all
rezonings and zoning regulations amendments adopted under this article shall be
consistent with and conform to the adopted comprehensive plan. In addition to
the other matters that are required or authorized under this section and
article 1 of this chapter, the zoning ordinance:
1. Shall show the zoning districts designated as
appropriate for various classes of residential, business and industrial uses
and shall provide for the establishment of setback lines and other plans
providing for adequate light, air and parking facilities and for expediting
traffic within the districts. 
2. May establish the percentage of a lot or parcel
that may be covered by buildings and the size of yards, courts and other open
spaces.
3. Shall consider access to incident solar energy.
4. May provide for retirement community zoning
districts.
5. May Shall provide
for the regulation and use of business licenses, adult oriented business
manager permits, and adult service
provider permits, drag show permits and drag performer permits
in conjunction with the establishment or operation of adult oriented businesses
and facilities, including adult arcades, adult bookstores or video stores,
cabarets, adult live entertainment establishments, adult motion picture
theaters, adult theaters, massage establishments, establishments
that conduct drag shows and nude model studios. With respect to
cabarets, the ordinance shall not conflict with specific statutory or valid
regulatory requirements applicable to persons licensed to dispense alcoholic
beverages, but the ordinance may shall include
regulation of the age and conduct of erotic entertainers in a manner at least
as restrictive as rules adopted under title 4. Notwithstanding
section 11-812, a county in regulating or licensing businesses and
facilities pursuant to this paragraph may impose reasonable operating
requirements that affect the existing uses of businesses and facilities.
6. Shall designate and zone appropriate areas of
reasonable size in which there may be established with reasonable permanency
canneries, fertilizer plants, refineries, commercial feedlots, meat packing
plants, tallow works and other like businesses. A dairy operation,
including areas designated for the raising of replacement heifers or bulls
owned by the same dairy operation, is not subject to this paragraph, and is a
general agricultural purpose under subsection D, paragraph 2 of this section
and section 11-812, subsection A, paragraph 2. A replacement
heifer or bull raising operation of a dairy that is not on contiguous property
of the dairy is subject to this paragraph unless the operation begins within
one-quarter mile of the dairy. 
B. To carry out the purposes of this article, the
board may adopt overlay zoning districts and regulations applicable to
particular buildings, structures and land within individual
zones. For the purposes of this subsection, "overlay zoning
district" means a special zoning district that includes regulations that
modify regulations in another zoning district with which the overlay zoning
district is combined. Overlay zoning districts and regulations shall be
adopted pursuant to section 11-813. The provisions of overlay
zoning shall apply retroactively to authorize overlay zoning districts and
regulations adopted before April 20, 1993.
C. In accordance with article II, sections 1 and 2,
Constitution of Arizona, the board shall consider the individual property
rights and personal liberties of the residents of the county before adopting
any zoning ordinance.
D. This section does not authorize:
1. The imposition of dedications, exactions, fees or
other requirements that are not otherwise authorized by law.
2. The regulation or
restriction of the use or occupation of land or improvements for railroad,
mining, metallurgical, grazing or general agricultural purposes, if the tract
concerned is five or more contiguous commercial acres. For the
purposes of this paragraph, general agricultural purposes do not include the
cultivation of cannabis as defined in section 13-3401 or marijuana as
defined in section 13-3401 or 36-2801.
E. For the purposes of this section:
1. "Adult arcade" means any place to which
the public is permitted allowed or
invited and in which coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically,
electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines,
projectors or other image producing image-producing
devices are maintained to show images involving specific sexual activities or
specific anatomical areas to persons in booths or viewing rooms.
2. "Adult bookstore or video store" means
a commercial establishment that offers for sale or rent any of the following as
one of its principal business purposes:
(a) Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed
matter, photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes or reproductions or
slides or other visual representations that depict or describe specific sexual
activities or specific anatomical areas.
(b) Instruments, devices or paraphernalia that are
designed for use in connection with specific sexual activities.
3. "Adult live entertainment
establishment" means an establishment that features either:
(a) Persons who appear in a state of nudity.
(b) Live performances that are characterized by the
exposure of specific anatomical areas or specific sexual activities.
4. "Adult motion picture theater" means a
commercial establishment in which for any form of consideration films, motion
pictures, videocassettes, slides or other similar photographic reproductions
that are characterized by the depiction or description of specific sexual
activities or specific anatomical areas are predominantly shown.
5. "Adult oriented business" means adult
arcades, adult bookstores or video stores, cabarets, adult live entertainment
establishments, adult motion picture theaters, adult theaters, massage
establishments that offer adult service, establishments that
conduct drag shows, drag performers or nude model studios.
6. "Adult oriented business manager" means
a person on the premises of an adult oriented business who is authorized to
exercise overall operational control of the business.
7. "Adult service" means dancing, serving
food or beverages, modeling, posing, wrestling, singing, reading, talking,
listening or other performances or activities conducted for any consideration
in an adult oriented business by a person who is nude or seminude during all or
part of the time that the person is providing the service.
8. "Adult service provider" or
"erotic entertainer" means any natural person who provides an adult
service.
9. "Adult theater" means a theater,
concert hall, auditorium or similar commercial establishment that predominantly
features persons who appear in a state of nudity or who engage in live
performances that are characterized by the exposure of specific anatomical
areas or specific sexual activities.
10. "Cabaret" means an adult oriented
business licensed to provide alcoholic beverages pursuant to title 4, chapter
2, article 1.
11. "Discernibly turgid state" means the
state of being visibly swollen, bloated, inflated or distended.
12. "Drag performer" means
a person who dresses in clothing and uses makeup and other physical markers
opposite of the person's gender at birth to exaggerate gender signifiers and
roles and engages in singing, dancing or a monologue or skit in order to
entertain an audience.
13. "Drag show" means a
show or performance for entertainment at which a single performer or group of
performers dress in clothing and use makeup and other physical markers opposite
of the performer's or group of performers' gender at birth to exaggerate gender
signifiers and roles and engage in singing, dancing or a monologue or skit in
order to entertain an audience of two or more people.
12. 14. "Massage
establishment" means an establishment in which a person, firm, association
or corporation engages in or permits massage activities, including any method
of pressure on, friction against, stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping,
pounding, vibrating or stimulating of external soft parts of the body with the
hands or with the aid of any mechanical apparatus or electrical apparatus or
appliance. This paragraph does not apply to:
(a) Persons who are licensed pursuant to title 32,
chapter 7, 8, 13, 14 or 17.
(b) Registered nurses, licensed practical nurses or
technicians who are acting under the supervision of a physician who is licensed
pursuant to title 32, chapter 13 or 17.
(c) Registered nurse practitioners who are licensed
pursuant to title 32, chapter 15.
(d) Persons who are employed or acting as trainers
for a bona fide amateur, semiprofessional or professional athlete or athletic
team.
(e) Persons who are licensed pursuant to title 32,
chapter 3 or 5 if the activity is limited to the head, face or neck.
13. 15. "Nude
model studio":
(a) Means
a place in which a person who appears in a state of nudity or who displays
specific anatomical areas is observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured,
photographed or otherwise depicted by other persons who pay money or other
consideration. Nude model studio 
(b) Does
not include a proprietary school that is licensed by this state, a college,
community college or university that is supported entirely or in part by
taxation, a private college or university that maintains and operates
educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, community
college or university that is supported entirely or in part by taxation or a
structure to which the following apply:
(a) (i) A sign is not visible from the exterior of the
structure and no other advertising appears indicating that a nude person is
available for viewing.
(b) (ii) A student must enroll at least three days in
advance of a class in order to participate.
(c) (iii) No more than one nude or seminude model is on the
premises at any time.
14. 16. "Nude",
"nudity" or "state of nudity" means any of the following:
(a) The appearance of a human anus, genitals or a
female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola.
(b) A state of dress that fails to opaquely cover a
human anus, genitals or a female breast below a point immediately above the top
of the areola.
15. 17. "Principal
business purposes" means that a commercial establishment derives fifty
percent or more of its gross income from the sale or rental of items listed in
paragraph 2 of this subsection.
16. 18. "Seminude" means a state of dress in
which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region and female breast
below a point immediately above the top of the areola, as well as portions of
the body that are covered by supporting straps or devices.
17. 19. "Specific
anatomical areas" means any of the following:
(a) A human anus, genitals, the pubic region or a
female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola that is
less than completely and opaquely covered.
(b) Male genitals in a discernibly turgid state even
if completely and opaquely covered.
18. 20. "Specific
sexual activities" means any of the following:
(a) Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation
or arousal.
(b) Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or
simulated, including acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, oral
copulation or sodomy.
(c) Fondling or other erotic touching of the human
genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breast.
(d) Excretory functions as part of or in connection
with any of the activities under subdivision (a), (b) or (c) of this paragraph.
END_STATUTE
Sec. 2. Section 12-741, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:
START_STATUTE12-741. Unauthorized disclosure of intimate images; civil action;
exceptions; confidential information form; remedies; statute of limitations;
definitions
A. A person is liable in a civil action for
intentionally disclosing or threatening to disclose an intimate image of
another individual if the depicted individual suffers harm from the disclosure
or threatened disclosure and the person knew or should have known all of the
following:
1. The depicted individual did not consent to the
disclosure.
2. The intimate image was private.
3. The depicted individual was identifiable from the
image itself or from information that is displayed in connection with the
image.
B. Evidence that the depicted individual consented
to the creation of the image or that the depicted individual previously consented
to the disclosure of the image does not by itself establish that the depicted
individual consented to the disclosure of the intimate image or that the
depicted individual lacked a reasonable expectation of privacy.
C. A depicted individual who does not consent to the
specific sexual activities or state of nudity depicted in an intimate image of
the individual retains a reasonable expectation of privacy even if the image
was created when the depicted individual was in a public place.
D. Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, a
person is not liable under this section if the person proves that disclosing or
threatening to disclose the intimate image was any of the following:
1. Made in good faith
in any of the following:
(a) Law enforcement.
(b) A legal proceeding.
(c) Medical education or treatment.
2. Made in good faith in reporting or investigating
any of the following:
(a) Unlawful conduct.
(b) Unsolicited and unwelcome conduct.
3. Related to a matter of public concern or public
interest.
4. Reasonably intended to assist the depicted
individual.
5. Made by a parent, legal guardian or individual
with legal custody of a child and the depicted individual is the child unless
the image is disclosed with the intent to harm the depicted individual.
E. Subsection D of this section does not apply if
the plaintiff proves the disclosure was prohibited by law or made for the
purpose of sexual arousal, sexual gratification, humiliation, degradation or
monetary or commercial gain.
F. Disclosing or threatening to disclose an intimate
image is not a matter of public concern or public interest solely because the
depicted individual is a public figure.
G. If the plaintiff files with the court and serves
on the defendant a confidential information form that includes the excluded or
redacted plaintiff's name and other identifying characteristics, the court may
exclude or redact from all pleadings and documents filed in the action other
identifying characteristics of the plaintiff. The court may make
further orders as necessary to protect the identity and privacy of a plaintiff.
H. The prevailing plaintiff may recover:
1. The greater of:
(a) Economic and noneconomic damages that are
proximately caused by the defendant's disclosure or threatened disclosure,
including damages for emotional distress whether or not accompanied by other
damages.
(b) Statutory damages of not more than $10,000
against each defendant found liable under this section for all of the
defendant's disclosures and threatened disclosures that the plaintiff knew or
reasonably should have known when filing the action or that became known during
the pendency of the action. In determining the amount of statutory
damages under this subdivision, consideration must be given to the age of the
parties at the time of the disclosure or threatened disclosure, the number of
disclosures or threatened disclosures made by the defendant, the breadth of
distribution of the image by the defendant and other exacerbating or mitigating
factors. 
2. An amount equal to any monetary gain made by the
defendant from disclosing or threatening to disclose the intimate image.
3. Punitive damages.
4. Reasonable attorney fees and costs. 
5. Additional relief, including injunctive relief.
I. A civil action for an unauthorized disclosure may
not be brought later than four years after the date that the disclosure was
discovered or should have been discovered with the exercise of reasonable
diligence except that a threat to disclose may not be brought later than four
years after the date of the threat to disclose.
J. In a civil action brought by a depicted
individual who was a minor on the date of the disclosure or threat to disclose,
the time specified in subsection I of this section does not begin to run until
the depicted individual attains the age of majority.
K. For the purposes of this section:
1. "Consent" means affirmative, conscious
and voluntary authorization by an individual with legal capacity to give
authorization.
2. "Depicted individual" means an
individual whose body is shown in whole or in part in an intimate image.
3. "Disclose" or "disclosure"
means to display, distribute, publish, advertise or offer.
4. "Harm" includes physical harm, economic
harm and emotional distress whether or not accompanied by physical or economic
harm.
5. "Intimate image" means a photograph,
film, videotape, digital recording or other similar medium that shows a state
of nudity or specific sexual activities.
6. "Private" means either of the
following:
(a) Created or obtained under circumstances in which
a depicted individual had a reasonable expectation of privacy.
(b) Made accessible through theft, bribery,
extortion, fraud, false pretenses, voyeurism or exceeding authorized access to
an account, message, file, device, resource or property.
7. "Specific sexual activities" has the
same meaning prescribed in section 11-811.
8. "State of nudity" has the same meaning
prescribed in section 11-811, subsection E, paragraph 14
16, subdivision (a). END_STATUTE
Sec. 3. Section 13-1422, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:
START_STATUTE13-1422. Adult oriented businesses; location; hours of operation;
injunction; classification; definitions
A. An adult oriented business shall not be located
within one-fourth mile of a child care facility, a private, public or
charter school, a public playground, a public recreational facility, a
residence or a place of worship. For the purposes of this subsection,
measurements shall be made in a straight line in all directions, without regard
to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest point on the property
line of a parcel containing an adult oriented business to the nearest point on
the property line of a parcel containing a child care facility, a private,
public or charter school, a public playground, a public recreational facility,
a residence or a place of worship. An adult oriented business
lawfully operating in conformity with this section does not violate this
section if a child care facility, a private, public or charter school, a public
playground, a public recreational facility, a residence or a place of worship
subsequently locates within one-fourth mile of the adult oriented business.
B. An adult arcade, adult bookstore or video store,
adult cabaret, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, escort agency or
nude model studio shall not remain open at any time between the hours of 1:00
a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on Monday through Saturday and between the hours of 1:00
a.m. and 12:00 noon on Sunday. A drag show shall not be
conducted between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on Monday through
Saturday and between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon on Sunday.
C. Subsection A of this section does not prohibit
counties or municipalities from enacting and enforcing ordinances that regulate
the location of adult oriented businesses.
D. Subsection B of this section does not prohibit
counties or municipalities from enacting and enforcing ordinances that regulate
an adult arcade, adult bookstore or video store, adult cabaret, adult motion
picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, or nude model studio or drag show in a
manner that is at least as restrictive as subsection B of this section.
E. If there is reason to believe that a violation of
subsection A of this section is being committed in any county or city, the
county attorney of the county shall, or a citizen of this state who resides in
the county or city in the citizen's own name may, maintain an action to abate
and prevent the violation and to enjoin perpetually any person who is
committing the violation and the owner, lessee or agent of the building or
place in or on which the violation is occurring from directly or indirectly
committing or permitting allowing the
violation.
F. A violation of subsection A or B of this section
is a class 1 misdemeanor. Each day of violation constitutes a separate offense.
G. For the purposes
of this section:
1. "Adult
arcade" has the same meaning prescribed in section 11-811.
2. "Adult bookstore or video store" has
the same meaning prescribed in section 11-811.
3. "Adult cabaret": excludes
(a) Does not
include any establishment licensed under title 4. and
(b) Includes
any nightclub, bar, restaurant or other similar commercial establishment that
regularly features:
(a) (i) Persons who appear in a state of nudity or who are
seminude.
(b) (ii) Live performances that are characterized by the
exposure of specific anatomical areas or specific sexual activities.
(c) (iii) Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or
other photographic reproductions that are characterized by the depiction or
description of specific sexual activities or specific anatomical areas.
4. "Adult motion picture theater" has the
same meaning prescribed in section 11-811.
5. "Adult oriented business" has the same
meaning prescribed in section 11-811.
6. "Adult theater" has the same meaning
prescribed in section 11-811.
7. "Drag show" means a show
or performance for entertainment at which a single performer or group of
performers dress in clothing and use makeup and other physical markers opposite
of the performer's or group of performers' gender at birth to exaggerate gender
signifiers and roles and engage in singing, dancing or a monologue or skit in
order to entertain an audience of two or more people.
7. 8. "Escort"
means a person who for consideration agrees or offers to act as a companion,
guide or date for another person or who agrees or offers to privately model
lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another person.
8. 9. "Escort
agency" means a person or business association that furnishes, offers to
furnish or advertises the furnishing of escorts as one of its primary business
purposes for any fee, tip or other consideration.
9. 10. "Nude
model studio" has the same meaning prescribed in section 11-811.
10. 11. "Nude",
"nudity" or "state of nudity" has the same meaning
prescribed in section 11-811.
11. 12. "Place
of worship" means a structure where persons regularly assemble for
worship, ceremonies, rituals and education relating to a particular form of
religious belief and which a reasonable person would conclude is a place of
worship by reason of design, signs or architectural or other features.
12. 13. "Residence"
means a permanent dwelling place.
13. 14. "Seminude"
has the same meaning prescribed in section 11-811.
14. 15. "Specific
anatomical areas" has the same meaning prescribed in section 11-811.
15. 16. "Specific
sexual activities" has the same meaning prescribed in section 11-811.
END_STATUTE
Sec. 4. Section 13-1425, Arizona Revised Statutes, is amended to read:
START_STATUTE13-1425. Unlawful disclosure of images depicting states of nudity or
specific sexual activities; classification; definitions
A. It is unlawful for a person to intentionally
disclose an image of another person who is identifiable from the image itself
or from information displayed in connection with the image if all of the
following apply:
1. The person in the image is depicted in a state of
nudity or is engaged in specific sexual activities.
2. The depicted person has a reasonable expectation
of privacy. Evidence that a person has sent an image to another person using
an electronic device does not, on its own, remove the person's reasonable
expectation of privacy for that image.
3. The image is disclosed with the intent to harm,
harass, intimidate, threaten or coerce the depicted person.
B. This section does not apply to any of the
following:
1. The reporting of unlawful conduct.
2. Lawful and common practices of law enforcement,
criminal reporting, legal proceedings or medical treatment.
3. Images involving voluntary exposure in a public
or commercial setting.
4. An interactive computer service, as defined in 47
United States Code section 230(f)(2), or an information service, as defined in
47 United States Code section 153, with regard to content wholly provided by
another party.
5. Any disclosure that is made with the consent of
the person who is depicted in the image.
C. A violation of this section is a class 5 felony,
except that a violation of this section is a:
1. Class 4 felony if the image is disclosed by
electronic means.
2. Class 1 misdemeanor if a person threatens to
disclose but does not disclose an image that if disclosed would be a violation
of this section.
D. For the purposes of this section: 
1. "Disclose" means display, distribute,
publish, advertise or offer.
2. "Disclosed by electronic means" means
delivery to an email address, mobile device, tablet or other electronic device
and includes disclosure on a website.
3. "Harm" means physical injury, financial
injury or serious emotional distress.
4. "Image"
means a photograph, videotape, film or digital recording.
5. "Reasonable
expectation of privacy" means the person exhibits an actual expectation of
privacy and the expectation is reasonable.
6. "Specific sexual activities" has the
same meaning prescribed in section 11-811, subsection E, paragraph 18 20, subdivisions (a) and (b).
7. "State of nudity" has the same meaning
prescribed in section 11-811, subsection E, paragraph 14
16, subdivision (a). END_STATUTE

