


 
88R617 EAS-D


 


 

		By: Toth
H.B. No. 41




 


 



 		
			

A BILL TO BE ENTITLED




 
			

AN ACT




 
			
relating to professional liability insurance coverage for and 



 
			
prohibitions on the provision to certain children of procedures and 



 
			
treatments for gender transitioning, gender reassignment, or 



 
			
gender dysphoria.



 
			
       BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF TEXAS:



 
			
       SECTION 1.  Chapter 161, Health and Safety Code, is amended 



 
			
by adding Subchapter X to read as follows:



 
			
SUBCHAPTER X.  GENDER TRANSITIONING AND GENDER REASSIGNMENT 



 
			
PROCEDURES AND TREATMENTS FOR CERTAIN CHILDREN



 
			
       Sec. 161.701.  DEFINITIONS.  In this subchapter:



 
			
             (1)  "Child" means an individual who is younger than 18 



 
			
years of age.



 
			
             (2)  "Health care provider" means a person other than a 



 
			
physician who is licensed, certified, or otherwise authorized by 



 
			
the laws of this state to provide or render health care or to 



 
			
dispense or prescribe a prescription drug in the ordinary course of 



 
			
business or practice of a profession.



 
			
             (3)  "Physician" means a person licensed to practice 



 
			
medicine in this state.



 
			
       Sec. 161.702.  PROHIBITED PROVISION OF GENDER TRANSITIONING 



 
			
OR GENDER REASSIGNMENT PROCEDURES AND TREATMENTS TO CERTAIN 



 
			
CHILDREN.  For the purpose of transitioning a child's biological 



 
			
sex as determined by the sex organs, chromosomes, and endogenous 



 
			
profiles of the child or affirming the child's perception of the 



 
			
child's sex if that perception is inconsistent with the child's 



 
			
biological sex, a physician or health care provider may not:



 
			
             (1)  perform a surgery to sterilize the child, 



 
			
including:



 
			
                   (A)  castration;



 
			
                   (B)  vasectomy;



 
			
                   (C)  hysterectomy;



 
			
                   (D)  oophorectomy;



 
			
                   (E)  metoidioplasty;



 
			
                   (F)  orchiectomy;



 
			
                   (G)  penectomy;



 
			
                   (H)  phalloplasty; and



 
			
                   (I)  vaginoplasty;



 
			
             (2)  perform a mastectomy;



 
			
             (3)  provide, administer, prescribe, or dispense any of 



 
			
the following prescription drugs that induce transient or permanent 



 
			
infertility:



 
			
                   (A)  puberty suppression or blocking prescription 



 
			
drugs to stop or delay normal puberty;



 
			
                   (B)  supraphysiologic doses of testosterone to 



 
			
females; or



 
			
                   (C)  supraphysiologic doses of estrogen to males; 



 
			
or



 
			
             (4)  remove any otherwise healthy or non-diseased body 



 
			
part or tissue.



 
			
       Sec. 161.703.  EXCEPTIONS.  The prohibitions under Section 



 
			
161.702 do not apply to the provision by a physician or health care 



 
			
provider, with the consent of the child's parent or legal guardian, 



 
			
of appropriate and medically necessary gender transitioning or 



 
			
gender reassignment procedures or treatments to a child who:



 
			
             (1)  is born with a medically verifiable genetic 



 
			
disorder of sex development, including:



 
			
                   (A)  46, XX chromosomes with virilization;



 
			
                   (B)  46, XY chromosomes with undervirilization; 



 
			
or



 
			
                   (C)  both ovarian and testicular tissue; or



 
			
             (2)  does not have the normal sex chromosome structure 



 
			
for male or female as determined by a physician through genetic 



 
			
testing.



 
			
       SECTION 2.  Subchapter F, Chapter 1901, Insurance Code, is 



 
			
amended by adding Section 1901.256 to read as follows:



 
			
       Sec. 1901.256.  PROHIBITED COVERAGE FOR PROVISION OF CERTAIN 



 
			
GENDER-RELATED PROCEDURES AND TREATMENTS TO CERTAIN CHILDREN.  A 



 
			
professional liability insurance policy issued to a physician or 



 
			
health care provider may not include coverage for damages assessed 



 
			
against the physician or health care provider who provides to a 



 
			
child gender transitioning or gender reassignment procedures or 



 
			
treatments that are prohibited by Section 161.702, Health and 



 
			
Safety Code.



 
			
       SECTION 3.  Section 164.052, Occupations Code, is amended by 



 
			
amending Subsection (a) and adding Subsection (d) to read as 



 
			
follows:



 
			
       (a)  A physician or an applicant for a license to practice 



 
			
medicine commits a prohibited practice if that person:



 
			
             (1)  submits to the board a false or misleading 



 
			
statement, document, or certificate in an application for a 



 
			
license;



 
			
             (2)  presents to the board a license, certificate, or 



 
			
diploma that was illegally or fraudulently obtained;



 
			
             (3)  commits fraud or deception in taking or passing an 



 
			
examination;



 
			
             (4)  uses alcohol or drugs in an intemperate manner 



 
			
that, in the board's opinion, could endanger a patient's life;



 
			
             (5)  commits unprofessional or dishonorable conduct 



 
			
that is likely to deceive or defraud the public, as provided by 



 
			
Section 164.053, or injure the public;



 
			
             (6)  uses an advertising statement that is false, 



 
			
misleading, or deceptive;



 
			
             (7)  advertises professional superiority or the 



 
			
performance of professional service in a superior manner if that 



 
			
advertising is not readily subject to verification;



 
			
             (8)  purchases, sells, barters, or uses, or offers to 



 
			
purchase, sell, barter, or use, a medical degree, license, 



 
			
certificate, or diploma, or a transcript of a license, certificate, 



 
			
or diploma in or incident to an application to the board for a 



 
			
license to practice medicine;



 
			
             (9)  alters, with fraudulent intent, a medical license, 



 
			
certificate, or diploma, or a transcript of a medical license, 



 
			
certificate, or diploma;



 
			
             (10)  uses a medical license, certificate, or diploma, 



 
			
or a transcript of a medical license, certificate, or diploma that 



 
			
has been:



 
			
                   (A)  fraudulently purchased or issued;



 
			
                   (B)  counterfeited; or



 
			
                   (C)  materially altered;



 
			
             (11)  impersonates or acts as proxy for another person 



 
			
in an examination required by this subtitle for a medical license;



 
			
             (12)  engages in conduct that subverts or attempts to 



 
			
subvert an examination process required by this subtitle for a 



 
			
medical license;



 
			
             (13)  impersonates a physician or permits another to 



 
			
use the person's license or certificate to practice medicine in 



 
			
this state;



 
			
             (14)  directly or indirectly employs a person whose 



 
			
license to practice medicine has been suspended, canceled, or 



 
			
revoked;



 
			
             (15)  associates in the practice of medicine with a 



 
			
person:



 
			
                   (A)  whose license to practice medicine has been 



 
			
suspended, canceled, or revoked; or



 
			
                   (B)  who has been convicted of the unlawful 



 
			
practice of medicine in this state or elsewhere;



 
			
             (16)  performs or procures a criminal abortion, aids or 



 
			
abets in the procuring of a criminal abortion, attempts to perform 



 
			
or procure a criminal abortion, or attempts to aid or abet the 



 
			
performance or procurement of a criminal abortion;



 
			
             (17)  directly or indirectly aids or abets the practice 



 
			
of medicine by a person, partnership, association, or corporation 



 
			
that is not licensed to practice medicine by the board;



 
			
             (18)  performs an abortion on a woman who is pregnant 



 
			
with a viable unborn child during the third trimester of the 



 
			
pregnancy unless:



 
			
                   (A)  the abortion is necessary to prevent the 



 
			
death of the woman;



 
			
                   (B)  the viable unborn child has a severe, 



 
			
irreversible brain impairment; or



 
			
                   (C)  the woman is diagnosed with a significant 



 
			
likelihood of suffering imminent severe, irreversible brain damage 



 
			
or imminent severe, irreversible paralysis;



 
			
             (19)  performs an abortion on an unemancipated minor 



 
			
without the written consent of the child's parent, managing 



 
			
conservator, or legal guardian or without a court order, as 



 
			
provided by Section 33.003 or 33.004, Family Code, unless the 



 
			
abortion is necessary due to a medical emergency, as defined by 



 
			
Section 171.002, Health and Safety Code;



 
			
             (20)  otherwise performs an abortion on an 



 
			
unemancipated minor in violation of Chapter 33, Family Code;



 
			
             (21)  performs or induces or attempts to perform or 



 
			
induce an abortion in violation of Subchapter C, F, or G, Chapter 



 
			
171, Health and Safety Code;



 
			
             (22)  in complying with the procedures outlined in 



 
			
Sections 166.045 and 166.046, Health and Safety Code, wilfully 



 
			
fails to make a reasonable effort to transfer a patient to a 



 
			
physician who is willing to comply with a directive; [or]



 
			
             (23)  performs or delegates to another individual the 



 
			
performance of a pelvic examination on an anesthetized or 



 
			
unconscious patient in violation of Section 167A.002, Health and 



 
			
Safety Code; or



 
			
             (24)  for the purpose of facilitating the gender 



 
			
transition or treating the gender dysphoria of an unemancipated 



 
			
minor:



 
			
                   (A)  provides, administers, prescribes, or 



 
			
dispenses a puberty suppression or blocking prescription drug or 



 
			
cross-sex hormone to the minor, including by writing a false or 



 
			
fictitious prescription; or



 
			
                   (B)  performs or attempts to perform a surgical 



 
			
intervention on the minor.



 
			
       (d)  Notwithstanding Subsection (a)(24), a physician or 



 
			
applicant for a license to practice medicine does not commit a 



 
			
prohibited practice if the physician or applicant provides a 



 
			
puberty suppression or blocking prescription drug to an 



 
			
unemancipated minor for the purpose of normalizing puberty for a 



 
			
minor experiencing precocious puberty.



 
			
       SECTION 4.  Section 1901.256, Insurance Code, as added by 



 
			
this Act, applies only to a medical professional liability 



 
			
insurance policy that is delivered, issued for delivery, or renewed 



 
			
on or after January 1, 2024. An insurance policy that is delivered, 



 
			
issued for delivery, or renewed before January 1, 2024, is governed 



 
			
by the law in effect immediately before the effective date of this 



 
			
Act, and that law is continued in effect for that purpose.



 
			
       SECTION 5.  Section 164.052, Occupations Code, as amended by 



 
			
this Act, applies only to conduct that occurs on or after the 



 
			
effective date of this Act. Conduct that occurs before the 



 
			
effective date of this Act is governed by the law in effect on the 



 
			
date the conduct occurred, and the former law is continued in effect 



 
			
for that purpose.



 
			
       SECTION 6.  This Act takes effect September 1, 2023.


