


MISSISSIPPI LEGISLATURE
2023 Regular Session
To: Appropriations
By: Representative Criswell
House Bill 1099
AN ACT TO REQUIRE A FIDUCIARY OR THE GOVERNING BOARD OF A
PUBLIC RETIREMENT SYSTEM, IN MAKING AND SUPERVISING INVESTMENTS FOR THE PUBLIC
RETIREMENT SYSTEM, TO DISCHARGE ITS DUTIES SOLELY IN THE FINANCIAL INTEREST OF
THE PARTICIPANTS AND BENEFICIARIES FOR THE EXCLUSIVE PURPOSES OF PROVIDING
FINANCIAL BENEFITS TO PARTICIPANTS AND THEIR BENEFICIARIES AND DEFRAYING
REASONABLE EXPENSES OF ADMINISTERING THE SYSTEM; TO PROVIDE THAT AN INVESTMENT
MANAGER RETAINED BY THE GOVERNING BOARD SHALL BE SUBJECT TO THE SAME FIDUCIARY
DUTIES AS THE BOARD; TO REQUIRE A FIDUCIARY TO TAKE INTO ACCOUNT ONLY FINANCIAL
FACTORS WHEN DISCHARGING ITS DUTIES WITH RESPECT TO A RETIREMENT PLAN; TO
PROVIDE THAT FINANCIAL FACTORS DO NOT INCLUDE ANY ACTION TAKEN, OR FACTOR
CONSIDERED, BY A FIDUCIARY WITH ANY PURPOSE TO FURTHER SOCIAL, POLITICAL OR
IDEOLOGICAL INTERESTS; TO PROVIDE THAT ALL SHARES HELD DIRECTLY OR INDIRECTLY
BY OR ON BEHALF OF A PUBLIC RETIREMENT SYSTEM AND/OR THE PARTICIPANTS AND THEIR
BENEFICIARIES SHALL BE VOTED SOLELY IN THE FINANCIAL INTEREST OF PLAN
PARTICIPANTS AND THEIR BENEFICIARIES; TO PROVIDE THAT THIS ACT, OR ANY CONTRACT
SUBJECT TO THIS ACT, MAY BE ENFORCED BY THE ATTORNEY GENERAL; TO PROVIDE THAT A
PERSON OR COMPANY WHO SERVES AS A FIDUCIARY AND WHO VIOLATES THE FIDUCIARY DUTY
IMPOSED BY THIS ACT SHALL BE OBLIGATED TO PAY DAMAGES TO THE PUBLIC RETIREMENT
SYSTEM IN AN AMOUNT EQUAL TO THREE TIMES ALL MONIES PAID TO THE PERSON OR
COMPANY BY THE SYSTEM FOR THE SERVICES OF THE PERSON OR COMPANY; TO AMEND
SECTIONS 25-11-121 AND 25-11-407, MISSISSIPPI CODE OF 1972, TO CONFORM TO THE
PRECEDING PROVISIONS; AND FOR RELATED PURPOSES.
     BE IT ENACTED BY THE
LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF MISSISSIPPI:
     SECTION 1.  Definitions.
 As used in this act, the following terms shall be defined as provided in this
subsection:
          (a)  "Board" means
the board of trustees or other governing board of the public retirement system.
          (b)  "Fiduciary"
includes any person acting on behalf of the board of trustees as an investment
manager or proxy advisor.
          (c)  "Fiduciary commitment"
means any evidence of a fiduciary's purpose in managing assets as a fiduciary,
including, but not limited to, any of the following in a fiduciary's capacity
as a fiduciary:
               (i)  Advertising,
statements, explanations, reports, letters to clients, communications with
portfolio companies, statements of principles, or commitments; or
               (ii)  Participation
in, affiliation with, or status as a signatory to, any coalition, initiative,
joint statement of principles, or agreement.
          (c)  "Financial"
means having been prudently determined by a fiduciary to have a material effect
on the financial risk or the financial return of an investment.
               (i)  The term "financial"
does not include any action taken, or factor considered, by a fiduciary with
any purpose whatsoever to further social, political or ideological interests.
               (ii)  A fiduciary
may reasonably be determined to have taken an action, or considered a factor,
with a purpose to further social, political, or ideological interests based
upon evidence indicating such a purpose, including, but not limited to, any fiduciary
commitment to further, through portfolio company engagement, board or
shareholder votes, or otherwise as a fiduciary, any of the following beyond what
controlling federal or state law requires:
                    1.  Eliminating,
reducing, offsetting, or disclosing greenhouse gas emissions;
                    2.  Divesting
from, limiting investment in, or limiting the activities or investments of, any
company, for failing, or not committing, to meet environmental standards or
disclosures;
                    3.  Access to
abortion, sex or gender change or transgender surgery; or
                    4.  Divesting
from, limiting investment in, or limiting the activities or investments of, any
company that engages in, facilitates, or supports the manufacture, import,
distribution, marketing or advertising, sale, or lawful use of firearms, ammunition
or components parts and accessories of firearms or ammunition.
          (d)  "Governmental
entity" means:
               (i)  The State of Mississippi
or any political subdivision of the state; or
               (ii)  Any school,
college, university, administration, authority, or other enterprise operated by
the state or any political subdivision of the state.
          (e)  "Public retirement
system," "system" or "plan" means any retirement or
pension system or plan maintained, provided or offered by a governmental entity.
     SECTION 2.  Fiduciary
duty.  (1)  In making and supervising investments of the reserve fund of a
public retirement system, a fiduciary or the board shall discharge its duties
solely in the financial interest of the participants and beneficiaries for the
exclusive purposes of:
          (a)  Providing
financial benefits to participants and their beneficiaries; and
          (b)  Defraying
reasonable expenses of administering the system.
     (2)  An investment manager retained
by the board shall be subject to the same fiduciary duties as the board.
     (3)  A fiduciary shall take
into account only financial factors when discharging its duties with respect to
a plan. 
     (4)  All shares held directly
or indirectly by or on behalf of a public retirement system and/or the
participants and their beneficiaries shall be voted solely in the financial
interest of plan participants and their beneficiaries.
     (5)  Unless no economically
practicable alternative is available, the governmental entity that establishes
or maintains a public retirement system or the board of the system may not
grant proxy voting authority to any person who is not a part of the governmental
entity, unless that person has a practice of, and in writing commits to, follow
guidelines that match the governmental entity's and the board's obligation to
act solely upon financial factors.
     (5)  Unless no economically
practicable alternative is available, public retirement system assets shall not
be entrusted to a fiduciary, unless that fiduciary has a practice of, and in
writing commits to, follow guidelines, when engaging with portfolio companies
and voting shares or proxies, that match the governmental entity's and the board's
obligation to act solely upon financial factors.
     (6)  Unless no economically
practicable alternative is available, a fiduciary or the board may not adopt a
practice of following the recommendations of a proxy advisor or other service
provider, unless such advisor or service provider has a practice of, and in
writing commits to, follow proxy voting guidelines that match the governmental
entity's and the board's obligation to act solely upon financial factors.
     (7)  All proxy votes shall
be tabulated and reported annually to the board.  For each vote, the report
shall contain a vote caption, the plan's vote, the recommendation of company
management, and, if applicable, the proxy advisor's recommendation. These
reports shall be posted on a publicly available webpage on the board's website.

     SECTION 3.  Enforcement.
 (1)  This act, or any contract subject to this act, may be enforced by the Attorney
General. 
     (2)  If the Attorney General
has reasonable cause to believe that a person has engaged in, is engaging in,
or is about to engage in, a violation of this act, he or she may:
          (a)  Require such
person to file on such forms as he or she prescribes a statement or report in
writing, under oath, as to all the facts and circumstances concerning the violation;
and
          (b)  Such other data
and information as he or she may deem necessary.
     (3)  In addition to any
other remedies available at law or equity, a person or company who serves as a
fiduciary and who violates Section 2 of this act shall be obligated to pay
damages to the public retirement system in an amount equal to three (3) times
all monies paid to the person or company by the system for the services of the person
or company.
     SECTION 4.  Section
25-11-121, Mississippi Code of 1972, is amended as follows:
     25-11-121.  (1)  The board shall,
from time to time, determine the current requirements for benefit payments and administrative
expense which shall be maintained as a cash working balance, except that such cash
working balance shall not exceed at any time an amount necessary to meet the current
obligations of the system for a period of ninety (90) days.  Any amounts in excess
of such cash working balance shall be invested, as follows:
          (a)  Funds may be deposited
in any institution insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation that maintains
a facility that takes deposits in the State of Mississippi or a custodial bank;
          (b)  Corporate bonds and
taxable municipal bonds; or corporate short-term obligations of corporations or
of wholly owned subsidiaries of corporations, whose short-term obligations are rated
A-2 or better by Standard and Poor's, rated P-2 or better by Moody's Investment
Service, F-2 or better by Fitch Ratings, Ltd., or the equivalent of these ratings
if assigned by another United States Securities and Exchange Commission designated
Nationally Recognized Statistical Rating Organization;
          (c)  Agency and nonagency
residential and commercial mortgage-backed securities and collateralized mortgage
obligations;
          (d)  Asset-backed securities;
          (e)  Bank loans;
          (f)  Convertible bonds;
          (g)  Bonds of the Tennessee
Valley Authority;
          (h)  Bonds, notes, certificates
and other valid obligations of the United States, and other valid obligations of
any federal instrumentality that issues securities under authority of an act of
Congress and are exempt from registration with the Securities and Exchange Commission;
          (i)  Bonds, notes, debentures
and other securities issued by any federal instrumentality and fully guaranteed
by the United States;
          (j)  Interest-bearing revenue
bonds or notes or bonds or notes which are general obligations of any state in the
United States or of any city or county therein;
          (k)  Bonds of established
non-United States companies and foreign government securities.  The board may take
requisite action to effectuate or hedge transactions or invest in currency through
foreign or domestic banks, including the purchase and sale, transfer, exchange,
or otherwise disposal of, and generally deal in foreign exchange through the use
of foreign currency, interbank forward contracts, futures contracts, options contracts,
swaps and other related derivative instruments, notwithstanding any other provisions
of this article to the contrary;
          (l)  Shares of stocks, common
and/or preferred, of corporations created by or existing under the laws of the United
States or any state, district or territory thereof and shares of stocks, common
and/or preferred, and convertible securities of non-United States companies; provided:
               (i)  The maximum investments
in stocks shall not exceed eighty percent (80%) of the total book value of the total
investment fund of the system;
              (ii)  The stock of such
corporation shall:
                   1.  Be listed on
a national stock exchange; or
                   2.  Be traded in
the over-the-counter market;
              (iii)  The outstanding
shares of such corporation shall have a total market value of not less than Fifty
Million Dollars ($50,000,000.00);
              (iv)  The amount of
investment in any one (1) corporation shall not exceed three percent (3%) of the
book value of the assets of the system;
              (v)  The shares of any
one (1) corporation owned by the system shall not exceed five percent (5%) of that
corporation's outstanding stock.
     The board may take requisite
action utilizing foreign currency as an investment vehicle, or to effectuate or
hedge transactions for shares of stocks and convertible securities of non-United
States companies through foreign or domestic banks, including the purchase and sale,
transfer, exchange, or otherwise disposal of, and generally deal in foreign exchange
through the use of foreign currency, interbank forward contracts, futures contracts,
options contracts, swaps and other related derivative instruments, notwithstanding
any other provisions of this article to the contrary;
          (m)  Covered call and put
options on securities or indices traded on one or more of the regulated exchanges;
          (n)  Pooled or commingled
funds managed by a corporate trustee or by a Securities and Exchange Commission
registered investment advisory firm retained as an investment manager by the board
of trustees, and shares of investment companies and unit investment trusts registered
under the Investment Company Act of 1940, where such pooled or commingled funds
or shares are comprised of common or preferred stocks, bonds, money market instruments
or other investments authorized under this section.  Such investment in commingled
funds or shares shall be held in trust; provided that the total book value of investments
under this paragraph shall at no time exceed five percent (5%) of the total book
value of all investments of the system.  Any investment manager approved by the
board of trustees shall invest such commingled funds or shares as a fiduciary in
accordance with Sections 1 though 3 of this act;
          (o)  Pooled or commingled
real estate funds or real estate securities managed by a corporate trustee or by
a Securities and Exchange Commission registered investment advisory firm retained
as an investment manager by the board of trustees. Such investment in commingled
funds or shares shall be held in trust; provided that the total book value of investments
under this paragraph shall at no time exceed ten percent (10%) of the total book
value of all investments of the system.  Any investment manager approved by the
board of trustees shall invest such commingled funds or shares as a fiduciary in
accordance with Sections 1 though 3 of this act.  The ten percent (10%) limitation
in this paragraph shall not be subject to the five percent (5%) limitation in paragraph
(n) of this subsection;
          (p)  Types of investments
not specifically authorized by this subsection if the investments are in the form
of a separate account managed by a Securities and Exchange Commission registered
investment advisory firm retained as an investment manager by the board; or a limited
partnership or commingled fund approved by the board; provided that the total book
value of investments under this paragraph shall at no time exceed twenty percent
(20%) of the total book value of all investments of the system.  Any person or entity
who exercises any discretionary authority or discretionary control respecting management
of the separate account, limited partnership or commingled fund, or who exercises
any authority or control respecting management or disposition of the assets of the
separate account, limited partnership or commingled fund, shall exercise such authority
or control as a fiduciary in accordance with Sections 1 though 3 of this act.
     (2)  All investments shall be
acquired at prices not exceeding the prevailing market values for such investments.
     (3)  Any limitations herein set
forth shall be applicable only at the time of purchase and shall not require the
liquidation of any investment at any time.  All investments shall be clearly marked
to indicate ownership by the system and to the extent possible shall be registered
in the name of the system.
     (4)  Subject to the above terms,
conditions, limitations and restrictions, the board shall have power to sell, assign,
transfer and dispose of any of the securities and investments of the system, provided
that said sale, assignment or transfer has the majority approval of the entire board. 
The board may employ or contract with investment managers, evaluation services or
other such services as determined by the board to be necessary for the effective
and efficient operation of the system.
     (5)  Except as otherwise provided
herein, no trustee and no employee of the board shall have any direct or indirect
interest in the income, gains or profits of any investment made by the board, nor
shall any such person receive any pay or emolument for his services in connection
with any investment made by the board.  No trustee or employee of the board shall
become an endorser or surety, or in any manner an obligor for money loaned by or
borrowed from the system.
     (6)  All interest derived from
investments and any gains from the sale or exchange of investments shall be credited
by the board to the account of the system.
     (7)  The board of trustees shall
credit regular interest to the annuity savings account monthly.  Regular interest
shall mean such per centum rate to be compounded annually as set by the board of
trustees through regulation.
     (8)  The board of trustees shall
be the custodian of the funds of the system.  All retirement allowance payrolls
shall be certified by the executive director who shall furnish the board a surety
bond in a company authorized to do business in Mississippi in such an amount as
shall be required by the board, the premium to be paid by the board from the expense
account.
     (9)  For the purpose of meeting
disbursements for retirement allowances, annuities and other payments, cash may
be kept available, not exceeding the requirements of the system for a period of
ninety (90) days, on deposit in one or more banks or trust companies organized under
the laws of the State of Mississippi or the laws of the United States, provided
that the sum on deposit in any one (1) bank or trust company shall not exceed thirty-five
percent (35%) of the paid-up capital and regular surplus of such bank or trust company.
     (10)  The board, the executive
director and employees shall discharge their duties with respect to the investments
of the system solely for the interest of the system with the care, skill, prudence
and diligence under the circumstances then prevailing that a prudent investor acting
in a like capacity and familiar with such matters would use in the conduct of an
enterprise of a like character and with like aims, including diversifying the investments
of the system so as to minimize the risk of large losses, unless under the circumstances
it is clearly prudent not to do so.  The board, the executive director and employees
shall discharge their duties under this subsection in accordance with Sections 1
though 3 of this act.
     (11)  Documentary material or
data made or received by the system which consists of trade secrets or commercial
or financial information that relates to the investments of the system shall be
exempt from the Mississippi Public Records Act of 1983 if the disclosure of the
material or data is likely to impair the system's ability to obtain such information
in the future, or is likely to cause substantial harm to the competitive position
of the person or entity from whom the information was obtained.
     SECTION 5.  Section
25-11-407, Mississippi Code of 1972, is amended as follows:
     25-11-407.  The Board of
Trustees of the Public Employees' Retirement System shall designate not less than
three (3) nor more than five (5) companies to provide annuity contracts, mutual
fund accounts or similar investment products, and the types of investment
contracts or funds that may be offered by those companies.  In making those
designations, the board of trustees shall consider and be guided by:
          (a)  The nature and
extent of the rights and benefits to be provided by those contracts or
accounts, or both, for participants and their beneficiaries;
          (b)  The relation of
those rights and benefits to the amount of contributions to be made;
          (c)  The suitability of
those rights and benefits to the needs of the participants;
          (d)  The efficacy of
the contracts or accounts, or both, in the recruitment and retention of faculty
and administrators; 
          (e)  The ability and
experience of the designated  companies in providing those suitable rights and
benefits under  those contracts or accounts, or both; and
          (f)  The ability and
experience of the designated companies to provide both suitable participant
investment guidance and investment options.
     The companies shall act in a
fiduciary capacity in accordance with Sections 1 through 3 of this act
in selecting investment products that are suitable for the optional retirement
program.  It shall be the duty of the companies to report to and seek approval
from the board for the investment products made available under this paragraph
and to report the participant use of those options annually.  The board
reserves the right to refuse or discontinue any product offered by those
companies.
     SECTION 6.  This act
shall take effect and be in force from and after July 1, 2023.




