


 
88R1595 EAS-D


 


 

		By: Hall, Campbell, Perry
S.B. No. 249




 


 



 		
			

A BILL TO BE ENTITLED




 
			

AN ACT




 
			
relating to the offense of genital mutilation.



 
			
       BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF TEXAS:



 
			
       SECTION 1.  The heading to Chapter 167, Health and Safety 



 
			
Code, is amended to read as follows:



 
			
CHAPTER 167.  [FEMALE] GENITAL MUTILATION



 
			
       SECTION 2.  The heading to Section 167.001, Health and 



 
			
Safety Code, is amended to read as follows:



 
			
       Sec. 167.001.  [FEMALE] GENITAL MUTILATION PROHIBITED.



 
			
       SECTION 3.  Section 167.001, Health and Safety Code, is 



 
			
amended by amending Subsections (a), (c), and (d) and adding 



 
			
Subsections (a-1), (e), and (f) to read as follows:



 
			
       (a)  A person commits an offense if the person:



 
			
             (1)  knowingly performs a procedure described by 



 
			
Subsection (a-1) on [circumcises, excises, or infibulates any part 



 
			
of the labia majora or labia minora or clitoris of] another person 



 
			
who is younger than 18 years of age;



 
			
             (2)  is a parent, caretaker, or legal guardian of 



 
			
another person who is younger than 18 years of age and knowingly 



 
			
consents to or facilitates a procedure described by Subsection 



 
			
(a-1) [permits an act described by Subdivision (1)] to be performed 



 
			
on that person; or



 
			
             (3)  knowingly transports or facilitates the 



 
			
transportation of another person who is younger than 18 years of age 



 
			
within this state or from this state for the purpose of having a 



 
			
procedure described by Subsection (a-1) [an act described by 



 
			
Subdivision (1)] performed on that person.



 
			
       (a-1)  This section applies only to a procedure that involves 



 
			
the partial or total removal of, or other injury to, the genitals of 



 
			
a person, including the following genital surgeries:



 
			
             (1)  clitorectomy, clitoroplasty, clitoral reduction, 



 
			
and clitoral recession, including corporal-sparing procedures;



 
			
             (2)  vaginoplasty, introitoplasty, vaginal 



 
			
exteriorization, and partial or total urogenital sinus 



 
			
mobilization;



 
			
             (3)  labiaplasty and labial reduction;



 
			
             (4)  hypospadias surgery, relocation of the urethral 



 
			
meatus, and chordee release;



 
			
             (5)  phalloplasty; and



 
			
             (6)  gonadectomy, including of testes, ovaries, 



 
			
ovotestes, or streak gonads.



 
			
       (c)  It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (a) 



 
			
that:



 
			
             (1)  the person performing the procedure [act] is a 



 
			
physician or other licensed health care professional and the 



 
			
procedure [act] is within the scope of the person's license; and



 
			
             (2)  the procedure is: 



 
			
                   (A)  necessary for the person's physical health;



 
			
                   (B)  male circumcision; or



 
			
                   (C)  performed on an intersex person [act is 



 
			
performed for medical purposes].



 
			
       (d)  It is not a defense to prosecution under Subsection (a)



 
			
[this section] that the procedure is required as a matter of 



 
			
religion, custom, tradition, ritual, or standard practice[:



 
			
             [(1)  the person on whom the circumcision, excision, or 



 
			
infibulation was performed or was to be performed, or another 



 
			
person authorized to consent to medical treatment of that person, 



 
			
including that person's parent or legal guardian, consented to the 



 
			
circumcision, excision, or infibulation;



 
			
             [(2)  the circumcision, excision, or infibulation is 



 
			
required by a custom or practice of a particular group; or



 
			
             [(3)  the circumcision, excision, or infibulation was 



 
			
performed or was to be performed as part of or in connection with a 



 
			
religious or other ritual].



 
			
       (e)  In this section, "intersex person" means a person who:



 
			
             (1)  has inborn chromosomal, gonadal, genital, or 



 
			
endocrine characteristics, or a combination of those 



 
			
characteristics, that are not suited to the typical definition of 



 
			
male or female or are atypical for the determined sex of the person; 



 
			
or



 
			
             (2)  is considered by a medical professional to have 



 
			
inborn chromosomal, gonadal, genital, or endocrine characteristics 



 
			
that are ambiguous or atypical for the determined sex of the person.



 
			
       (f)  Title 4, Penal Code, applies to an offense under this 



 
			
section.



 
			
       SECTION 4.  The changes in law made by this Act apply only to 



 
			
an offense committed on or after the effective date of this Act.  An 



 
			
offense committed before the effective date of this Act is governed 



 
			
by the law in effect on the date the offense was committed, and the 



 
			
former law is continued in effect for that purpose.  For purposes 



 
			
of this section, an offense was committed before the effective date 



 
			
of this Act if any element of the offense occurred before that date.



 
			
       SECTION 5.  This Act takes effect immediately if it receives 



 
			
a vote of two-thirds of all the members elected to each house, as 



 
			
provided by Section 39, Article III, Texas Constitution.  If this 



 
			
Act does not receive the vote necessary for immediate effect, this 



 
			
Act takes effect September 1, 2023.


