


MISSISSIPPI LEGISLATURE
2023 Regular Session
To: Public Health and Human Services
By: Representative Lamar
House Bill 1126
AN ACT TO RESTRICT TRANSGENDER MEDICAL PROCEDURES FOR ANY PERSON
UNDER TWENTY-ONE YEARS OF AGE; TO PROVIDE DEFINITIONS FOR THE ACT; TO PROHIBIT THE
ADMINISTRATION OF OR THE ASSISTANCE IN THE ADMINISTRATION OF CROSS SEX HORMONES
OR PUBERTY BLOCKING DRUGS; TO PROHIBIT THE PERFORMANCE OF GENDER REASSIGNMENT SURGERY;
TO PROHIBIT PHYSICIANS AND OTHER HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONALS FROM PROVIDING
GENDER TRANSITION PROCEDURES OR GENDER REASSIGNMENT SURGERY TO ANY PERSON UNDER
TWENTY-ONE YEARS OF AGE; TO PROHIBIT PHYSICIANS AND OTHER HEALTH CARE
PROFESSIONALS FROM REFERRING ANY PERSON UNDER A CERTAIN AGE TO ANY HEALTH CARE
PROFESSIONAL FOR GENDER TRANSITION OR GENDER REASSIGNMENT PROCEDURES; TO PROHIBIT
PARENTS, GUARDIANS OR PERSONS RESPONSIBLE FOR THE CARE OF A PERSON UNDER A CERTAIN
AGE FROM CONSENTING TO OR PROVIDING PUBERTY-BLOCKING DRUGS, CROSS SEX HORMONES;
TO PROVIDE CERTAIN EXCEPTIONS TO THOSE PROHIBITIONS; TO AMEND SECTION 97-5-39,
MISSISSIPPI CODE OF 1972, TO INCLUDE VIOLATIONS OF THIS ACT IN THE PENALTIES FOR
CHILD ABUSE; TO AMEND SECTION 43-21-105, MISSISSIPPI CODE OF 1972, TO REVISE THE
DEFINITION OF CHILD ABUSE TO INCLUDE VIOLATION OF THIS ACT; TO AMEND SECTION 97-5-51,
MISSISSIPPI CODE OF 1972, TO REQUIRE MANDATORY REPORTING OF PERSONS WHO VIOLATE
THE PROVISIONS OF THIS ACT; TO PROHIBIT THE DIRECT OR INDIRECT USE, GRANT,
PAYMENT OR DISTRIBUTION OF PUBLIC FUNDS TO ANY ENTITY, ORGANIZATION OR
INDIVIDUAL THAT PROVIDES GENDER TRANSITION PROCEDURES TO A PERSON UNDER TWENTY-ONE
YEARS OF AGE; TO PROVIDE THAT HEALTH CARE SERVICES FURNISHED IN A STATE OR
LOCALLY-OWNED HEALTH CARE FACILITY OR BY A PHYSICIAN OR OTHER HEALTH CARE
PROFESSIONAL EMPLOYED BY THE STATE OR LOCAL GOVERNMENT SHALL NOT INCLUDE GENDER
TRANSITION PROCEDURES FOR A PERSON UNDER TWENTY-ONE YEARS OF AGE; TO PROVIDE
THAT AMOUNTS PAID DURING A TAXABLE YEAR FOR PROVISION OF GENDER TRANSITION
PROCEDURES OR AS PREMIUMS FOR HEALTH CARE COVERAGE THAT INCLUDES COVERAGE FOR
GENDER TRANSITION PROCEDURES ARE NOT DEDUCTIBLE UNDER THE STATE INCOME TAX
LAWS; TO PROVIDE THAT ANY REFERRAL FOR OR PROVISION OF GENDER TRANSITION PROCEDURES
TO A PERSON UNDER TWENTY-ONE YEARS OF AGE BY A PHYSICIAN OR OTHER HEALTH CARE
PROFESSIONAL IS UNPROFESSIONAL CONDUCT AND IS SUBJECT TO DISCIPLINE BY THE APPROPRIATE
LICENSING ENTITY FOR THE HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONAL; TO AUTHORIZE THE ATTORNEY
GENERAL TO BRING AN ACTION TO ENFORCE COMPLIANCE WITH THIS ACT; TO CREATE NEW
SECTION 43-13-117.7, MISSISSIPPI CODE OF 1972, TO PROHIBIT THE DIVISION OF
MEDICAID FROM REIMBURSING OR PROVIDING COVERAGE FOR GENDER TRANSITION
PROCEDURES FOR A PERSON UNDER TWENTY-ONE YEARS OF AGE; TO AMEND SECTION 83-9-22,
MISSISSIPPI CODE OF 1972, TO PROVIDE THAT HEALTH COVERAGE PLANS ARE NOT REQUIRED
TO INCLUDE GENDER TRANSITION PROCEDURES; TO CREATE NEW SECTION 83-9-37,
MISSISSIPPI CODE OF 1972, TO PROVIDE THAT A HEALTH BENEFIT PLAN UNDER AN
INSURANCE POLICY OR OTHER PLAN PROVIDING HEALTH CARE COVERAGE SHALL NOT INCLUDE
REIMBURSEMENT FOR GENDER TRANSITION PROCEDURES FOR A PERSON UNDER TWENTY-ONE
YEARS OF AGE; TO AMEND SECTIONS 27-7-17, 73-15-29 AND 73-25-29, MISSISSIPPI
CODE OF 1972, TO CONFORM TO THE PROVISIONS OF THIS ACT; TO AMEND SECTION 11-46-5,
MISSISSIPPI CODE OF 1972, TO EXCLUDE FROM TORT IMMUNITY VIOLATIONS OF THIS ACT;
TO AMEND SECTION 11-1-60, MISSISSIPPI CODE OF 1972, TO EXCLUDE VIOLATION OF THIS
ACT FROM LIMITS ON NONECONOMIC DAMAGES; AND FOR RELATED PURPOSES.
     BE IT ENACTED BY THE
LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF MISSISSIPPI:
     SECTION 1.  For
purposes of this act, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed
herein:
          (a)  "Biological
sex" means the biological indication of male and female in the context of
reproductive potential or capacity, such as sex chromosomes, naturally
occurring sex hormones, gonads, and nonambiguous internal and external
genitalia present at birth, without regard to an individual's psychological,
chosen, or subjective experience of gender;
          (b)  "Cross-sex
hormones" means:
               (i)  Testosterone
or other androgens given to biological females in amounts that are larger or
more potent than would normally occur naturally in healthy biological sex
females; and
               (ii)  Estrogen
given to biological males in amounts that are larger or more potent than would
normally occur naturally in healthy biological sex males;
          (c)  "Gender"
means the psychological, behavioral, social, and cultural aspects of being male
or female;
          (d)  "Gender
reassignment surgery" means any medical or surgical service that seeks to surgically
alter or remove healthy physical or anatomical characteristics or features that
are typical for the individual's biological sex, in order to instill or create
physiological or anatomical characteristics that resemble a sex different from
the individual's biological sex, including, without limitation, genital or
nongenital gender reassignment surgery performed for the purpose of assisting
an individual with a gender transition including, without limitation:
               (i)  Surgical
procedures such as penectomy, orchiectomy, vaginoplasty, clitoroplasty, or
vulvoplasty for biologically male patients or hysterectomy or ovariectomy for
biologically female patients;
               (ii)  Reconstruction
of the fixed part of the urethra with or without a metoidioplasty; 
               (iii)  Phalloplasty,
vaginectomy, scrotoplasty, or implantation of erection or testicular prostheses
for biologically female patients;
               (iv)  Surgical
procedures for biologically male patients, such as augmentation mammoplasty, facial
feminization surgery, liposuction, lipofilling, voice surgery, thyroid
cartilage reduction, gluteal augmentation, hair reconstruction, or various
aesthetic procedures; or
               (v)  Surgical procedures
for biologically female patients, such as subcutaneous mastectomy, voice
surgery, liposuction, lipofilling, pectoral implants, or various aesthetic
procedures;
          (e)  "Gender
transition" means the process in which a person goes from identifying with
and living as a gender that corresponds to his or her biological sex to
identifying with and living as a gender different from his or her biological
sex, and may involve social, legal, or physical changes;
          (f)  (i)  "Gender
transition procedures" means any medical or surgical service, including,
without limitation, physician's services, inpatient and outpatient hospital
services, or prescribed drugs related to gender transition that seek to:
                    1.  Alter or remove
physical or anatomical characteristics or features that are typical for the
individual's biological sex; or
                    2.  Instill
or create physiological or anatomical characteristics that resemble a sex
different from the individual's biological sex, including, without limitation,
medical services that provide puberty-blocking drugs, cross-sex hormones, or
other mechanisms to promote the development of feminizing or masculinizing
features in the opposite biological sex, or genital or nongenital gender reassignment
surgery performed for the purpose of assisting an individual with a gender
transition.
               (ii)  "Gender
transition procedures" do not include:
                    1.  Services
to persons born with a medically verifiable disorder of sex development,
including a person with external biological sex characteristics that are irresolvably
ambiguous, such as those born with forty-six (46) XX chromosomes with
virilization, forty-six (46) XY chromosomes with undervirilization, or having
both ovarian and testicular tissue;
                    2.  Services
provided when a physician has otherwise diagnosed a disorder of sexual
development that the physician has determined through genetic or biochemical
testing that the person does not have normal sex chromosome structure, sex
steroid hormone production, or sex steroid hormone action;
                    3.  The
treatment of any infection, injury, disease, or disorder that has been caused
by or exacerbated by the performance of gender transition procedures, whether
or not the gender transition procedure was performed in accordance with state
and federal law or whether or not the funding for the gender transition
procedure is permissible under this act; or
                    4.  Any
procedure undertaken because the individual suffers from a physical disorder,
physical injury, or physical illness that would, as certified by a physician,
place the individual in imminent danger of death or impairment of major bodily
function unless surgery is performed;
          (g)  "Health care
professional" means a person who is licensed, certified, or otherwise
authorized by the laws of this state to administer health care in the ordinary
course of the practice of his or her profession;
          (h)  "Physician"
means a person who is licensed to practice medicine in this state;
          (i)  "Puberty-blocking
drugs" means gonadotropin-releasing hormone analogues or other synthetic
drugs used in biological males to stop luteinizing hormone secretion and
therefore testosterone secretion, or synthetic drugs used in biological females
which stop the production of estrogens and progesterone, when used to delay or suppress
pubertal development in children for the purpose of assisting an individual
with a gender transition; and
          (j)  "Public funds"
means state, county, or local government monies, in addition to any department,
agency, or instrumentality authorized or appropriated under state law or
derived from any fund in which such monies are deposited.
     SECTION 2.  (1)
 (a)  No person may administer, supply, consent to, or assist in administering or
supplying a puberty-blocking drug or cross-sex hormone to a person under the age
of twenty-one (21) years of age.  
          (b)  No person shall perform
or provide, or assist in the performance or provision of gender transition procedures
or gender reassignment surgery to a person under the age of twenty-one (21) years
of age. 
          (c)  A physician or
other health care professional shall not provide gender transition procedures
to any person under twenty-one (21) years of age.
          (d)  A physician, or
other health care professional shall not refer any person under twenty-one (21)
years of age to any health care professional for gender transition procedures.
          (e)  Any person who violates
the prohibitions described in this section shall be guilty of the felony crime of
"gender disfigurement" and upon conviction, fined no less than Ten Thousand
Dollars ($10,000.00), sentenced up to five (5) years in the custody of the Department
of Corrections, or both. 
     (2)  A physician who violates
the prohibition in subsection (1) of this section shall have his or her license
to practice medicine in the State of Mississippi revoked pursuant to action taken
by the Mississippi State Board of Medical Licensure.
     (3)  For any claim accruing on
or after July 1, 2023, a private cause of action may be brought against a physician,
osteopath or hospital for injuries arising out of the course of medical, surgical
or other professional services related to the performance of gender reassignment
surgery or services.  
     (4)  For any claim accruing on
or after July 1, 2023, no claim as provided for in subsection (2) of this section
may be brought unless it is filed within five (5) years from the date the alleged
act occurred.
     (5)  If at the time at which
the cause of action arose, the person to whom such claim has accrued shall be twenty-one
(21) years of age or younger, then such minor or the person claiming through
such minor may, notwithstanding that the period of time limited pursuant to
subsection (3) of this section shall have expired, commence action on such
claim at any time within two (2) years next after the time at which the minor shall
have reached his or her twenty-first birthday, or shall have died, whichever
shall have first occurred.
     SECTION 3.  Section
97-5-39, Mississippi Code of 1972, is amended as follows:
     97-5-39.  (1)  (a)  Except
as otherwise provided in this section, any parent, guardian or other person who
intentionally, knowingly or recklessly commits any act or omits the performance
of any duty, which act or omission contributes to or tends to contribute to the
neglect or delinquency of any child or which act or omission results in the
abuse of any child, as defined in Section 43-21-105(m) of the Youth Court Law,
or who knowingly aids any child in escaping or absenting himself from the
guardianship or custody of any person, agency or institution, or knowingly harbors
or conceals, or aids in harboring or concealing, any child who has absented
himself without permission from the guardianship or custody of any person,
agency or institution to which the child shall have been committed by the youth
court shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be punished
by a fine not to exceed One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00), or by imprisonment
not to exceed one (1) year in jail, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
          (b)  For the purpose of
this section, a child is a person who has not reached his eighteenth birthday. 
A child who has not reached his eighteenth birthday and is on active duty for a
branch of the armed services, or who is married, is not considered a child for
the purposes of this statute.
          (c)  If a child commits
one (1) of the proscribed acts in subsection (2)(a), (b) or (c) of this section
upon another child, then original jurisdiction of all such offenses shall be in
youth court.
          (d)  If the child's
deprivation of necessary clothing, shelter, health care or supervision
appropriate to the child's age results in substantial harm to the child's
physical, mental or emotional health, the person may be sentenced to
imprisonment in custody of the Department of Corrections for not more than five
(5) years or to payment of a fine of not more than Five Thousand Dollars
($5,000.00), or both.
          (e)  A parent, legal
guardian or other person who knowingly permits the continuing physical or sexual
abuse of a child is guilty of neglect of a child and may be sentenced to
imprisonment in the custody of the Department of Corrections for not more than
ten (10) years or to payment of a fine of not more than Ten Thousand Dollars
($10,000.00), or both.
     (2)  Any person shall be
guilty of felonious child abuse in the following circumstances: 
          (a)  Whether bodily
harm results or not, if the person shall intentionally, knowingly or
recklessly: 
              (i)  Burn any
child;
              (ii)  Physically
torture any child;
              (iii)  Strangle,
choke, smother or in any way interfere with any child's breathing;
              (iv)  Poison a
child;
              (v)  Starve a child
of nourishments needed to sustain life or growth;
              (vi)  Use any type
of deadly weapon upon any child;
          (b)  If some bodily
harm to any child actually occurs, and if the person shall intentionally,
knowingly or recklessly:
              (i)  Throw, kick,
bite, or cut any child;
              (ii)  Strike a
child under the age of fourteen (14) about the face or head with a closed fist;
              (iii)  Strike a
child under the age of five (5) in the face or head;
              (iv)  Kick, bite,
cut or strike a child's genitals; circumcision of a male child is not a
violation under this subparagraph (iv);
          (c)  If serious bodily
harm to any child actually occurs, and if the person shall intentionally,
knowingly or recklessly:
              (i)  Strike any
child on the face or head;
              (ii)  Disfigure or
scar any child;
              (iii)  Whip, strike
or otherwise abuse any child;
          (d)  If the person violates
subsection (1) of Section 2 of this act.
          ( * * *de)  Any person, upon conviction under
paragraph (a) or (c) of this subsection, shall be sentenced by the court to
imprisonment in the custody of the Department of Corrections for a term of not
less than five (5) years and up to life, as determined by the court.  Any person,
upon conviction under paragraph (b) or (d) of this subsection shall be
sentenced by the court to imprisonment in the custody of the Department of
Corrections for a term of not less than two (2) years nor more than ten (10)
years, as determined by the court.  For any second or subsequent conviction
under this subsection (2), the person shall be sentenced to imprisonment for
life.
          ( * * *ef)  For the purposes of this subsection
(2), "bodily harm" means any bodily injury to a child and includes,
but is not limited to, bruising, bleeding, lacerations, soft tissue swelling,
and external or internal swelling of any body organ.
          ( * * *fg)  For the purposes of this subsection
(2), "serious bodily harm" means any serious bodily injury to a child
and includes, but is not limited to, the fracture of a bone, permanent
disfigurement, permanent scarring, or any internal bleeding or internal trauma
to any organ, any brain damage, the removal of genitals from the child's body
in violation of paragraph (d) of this subsection, or implant of genitals to the
child's body in violation of paragraph (d) of this subsection, any injury
to the eye or ear of a child or other vital organ, and impairment of any bodily
function. 
          ( * * *gh)  Nothing contained in paragraph (c) of
this subsection shall preclude a parent or guardian from disciplining a child
of that parent or guardian, or shall preclude a person in loco parentis to a
child from disciplining that child, if done in a reasonable manner, and
reasonable corporal punishment or reasonable discipline as to that parent or
guardian's child or child to whom a person stands in loco parentis shall be a
defense to any violation charged under paragraph (c) of this subsection.
          ( * * *hi)  Reasonable discipline and
reasonable corporal punishment shall not be a defense to acts described in
paragraphs (a) and (b) of this subsection or if a child suffers serious bodily
harm as a result of any act prohibited under paragraph (c) of this subsection.
     (3)  Nothing contained in
this section shall prevent proceedings against the parent, guardian or other
person under any statute of this state or any municipal ordinance defining any
act as a crime or misdemeanor.  Nothing in the provisions of this section shall
preclude any person from having a right to trial by jury when charged with
having violated the provisions of this section.
     (4)  (a)  A parent, legal
guardian or caretaker who endangers a child's person or health by knowingly
causing or permitting the child to be present where any person is selling, manufacturing
or possessing immediate precursors or chemical substances with intent to
manufacture, sell or possess a controlled substance as prohibited under Section
41-29-139 or 41-29-313, is guilty of child endangerment and may be sentenced to
imprisonment for not more than ten (10) years or to payment of a fine of not
more than Ten Thousand Dollars ($10,000.00), or both.
          (b)  If the
endangerment results in substantial harm to the child's physical, mental or
emotional health, the person may be sentenced to imprisonment for not more than
twenty (20) years or to payment of a fine of not more than Twenty Thousand
Dollars ($20,000.00), or both.
     (5)  Nothing contained in
this section shall prevent proceedings against the parent, guardian or other person
under any statute of this state or any municipal ordinance defining any act as
a crime or misdemeanor.  Nothing in the provisions of this section shall preclude
any person from having a right to trial by jury when charged with having
violated the provisions of this section.
     (6)  After consultation with
the Department of Human Services, a regional mental health center or an
appropriate professional person, a judge may suspend imposition or execution of
a sentence provided in subsections (1) and (2) of this section and in lieu
thereof require treatment over a specified period of time at any approved
public or private treatment facility.  A person may be eligible for treatment
in lieu of criminal penalties no more than one (1) time.
     (7)  In any proceeding
resulting from a report made pursuant to Section 43-21-353 of the Youth Court
Law, the testimony of the physician making the report regarding the child's
injuries or condition or cause thereof shall not be excluded on the ground that
the physician's testimony violates the physician-patient privilege or similar
privilege or rule against disclosure.  The physician's report shall not be
considered as evidence unless introduced as an exhibit to his testimony.
     (8)  Any criminal
prosecution arising from a violation of this section shall be tried in the
circuit, county, justice or municipal court having jurisdiction; provided,
however, that nothing herein shall abridge or dilute the contempt powers of the
youth court.
     SECTION 4.  Section
43-21-105, Mississippi Code of 1972, is amended as follows:
     43-21-105.  The following
words and phrases, for purposes of this chapter, shall have the meanings
ascribed herein unless the context clearly otherwise requires:
          (a)  "Youth court"
means the Youth Court Division.
          (b)  "Judge"
means the judge of the Youth Court Division.
          (c)  "Designee"
means any person that the judge appoints to perform a duty which this chapter
requires to be done by the judge or his designee.  The judge may not appoint a
person who is involved in law enforcement or who is an employee of the
Mississippi Department of Human Services or the Mississippi Department of Child
Protection Services to be his designee.
          (d)  "Child"
and "youth" are synonymous, and each means a person who has not reached
his eighteenth birthday.  A child who has not reached his eighteenth birthday
and is on active duty for a branch of the armed services or is married is not
considered a "child" or "youth" for the purposes of this chapter.
          (e)  "Parent"
means the father or mother to whom the child has been born, or the father or
mother by whom the child has been legally adopted.
          (f)  "Guardian"
means a court-appointed guardian of the person of a child.
          (g)  "Custodian"
means any person having the present care or custody of a child whether such
person be a parent or otherwise.
          (h)  "Legal
custodian" means a court-appointed custodian of the child.
          (i)  "Delinquent
child" means a child who has reached his tenth birthday and who has
committed a delinquent act.
          (j)  "Delinquent
act" is any act, which if committed by an adult, is designated as a crime
under state or federal law, or municipal or county ordinance other than
offenses punishable by life imprisonment or death.  A delinquent act includes
escape from lawful detention and violations of the Uniform Controlled
Substances Law and violent behavior.
          (k)  "Child in
need of supervision" means a child who has reached his seventh birthday
and is in need of treatment or rehabilitation because the child:
              (i)  Is habitually
disobedient of reasonable and lawful commands of his parent, guardian or
custodian and is ungovernable; or
              (ii)  While being
required to attend school, willfully and habitually violates the rules thereof
or willfully and habitually absents himself therefrom; or
               (iii)  Runs away
from home without good cause; or
              (iv)  Has committed
a delinquent act or acts.
          (l)  "Neglected
child" means a child:
              (i)  Whose parent,
guardian or custodian or any person responsible for his care or support,
neglects or refuses, when able so to do, to provide for him proper and
necessary care or support, or education as required by law, or medical,
surgical, or other care necessary for his well-being; however, a parent who
withholds medical treatment from any child who in good faith is under treatment
by spiritual means alone through prayer in accordance with the tenets and
practices of a recognized church or religious denomination by a duly accredited
practitioner thereof shall not, for that reason alone, be considered to be
neglectful under any provision of this chapter; or
              (ii)  Who is
otherwise without proper care, custody, supervision or support; or
              (iii)  Who, for any
reason, lacks the special care made necessary for him by reason of his mental
condition, whether the mental condition is having mental illness or having an
intellectual disability; or
              (iv)  Who, for any
reason, lacks the care necessary for his health, morals or well-being.
          (m)  "Abused child"
means a child whose parent, guardian or custodian or any person responsible for
his care or support, whether legally obligated to do so or not, has caused or
allowed to be caused, upon the child, sexual abuse, sexual exploitation,
commercial sexual exploitation, emotional abuse, mental injury, nonaccidental physical
injury, the administration, supply, consent to, or assistance in administering
or supplying a puberty-blocking drug or cross-sex hormone, gender transition procedures
or gender reassignment surgery or other maltreatment.  However, physical
discipline, including spanking, performed on a child by a parent, guardian or
custodian in a reasonable manner shall not be deemed abuse under this section. 
"Abused child" also means a child who is or has been trafficked
within the meaning of the Mississippi Human Trafficking Act by any person,
without regard to the relationship of the person to the child.
          (n)  "Sexual abuse"
means obscene or pornographic photographing, filming or depiction of children
for commercial purposes, or the rape, molestation, incest, prostitution or
other such forms of sexual exploitation of children under circumstances which
indicate that the child's health or welfare is harmed or threatened.
          (o)  "A child in
need of special care" means a child with any mental or physical illness
that cannot be treated with the dispositional alternatives ordinarily available
to the youth court.
          (p)  A "dependent
child" means any child who is not a child in need of supervision, a
delinquent child, an abused child or a neglected child, and which child has been
voluntarily placed in the custody of the Department of Child Protection
Services by his parent, guardian or custodian.
          (q)  "Custody"
means the physical possession of the child by any person.
          (r)  "Legal custody"
means the legal status created by a court order which gives the legal custodian
the responsibilities of physical possession of the child and the duty to
provide him with food, shelter, education and reasonable medical care, all
subject to residual rights and responsibilities of the parent or guardian of
the person.
          (s)  "Detention"
means the care of children in physically restrictive facilities.
          (t)  "Shelter"
means care of children in physically nonrestrictive facilities.
          (u)  "Records
involving children" means any of the following from which the child can be
identified:
              (i)  All youth
court records as defined in Section 43-21-251;
              (ii)  All forensic
interviews conducted by a child advocacy center in abuse and neglect
investigations;
              (iii)  All law
enforcement records as defined in Section 43-21-255;
              (iv)  All agency
records as defined in Section 43-21-257; and
              (v)  All other
documents maintained by any representative of the state, county, municipality
or other public agency insofar as they relate to the apprehension, custody,
adjudication or disposition of a child who is the subject of a youth court
cause.
          (v)  "Any person
responsible for care or support" means the person who is providing for the
child at a given time.  This term shall include, but is not limited to, stepparents,
foster parents, relatives, nonlicensed babysitters or other similar persons
responsible for a child and staff of residential care facilities and group
homes that are licensed by the Department of Human Services or the Department
of Child Protection Services.
          (w)  The singular
includes the plural, the plural the singular and the masculine the feminine
when consistent with the intent of this chapter.
          (x)  "Out-of-home"
setting means the temporary supervision or care of children by the staff of licensed
day care centers, the staff of public, private and state schools, the staff of
juvenile detention facilities, the staff of unlicensed residential care
facilities and group homes and the staff of, or individuals representing, churches,
civic or social organizations.
          (y)  "Durable
legal custody" means the legal status created by a court order which gives
the durable legal custodian the responsibilities of physical possession of the
child and the duty to provide him with care, nurture, welfare, food, shelter,
education and reasonable medical care.  All these duties as enumerated are
subject to the residual rights and responsibilities of the natural parent(s) or
guardian(s) of the child or children.
          (z)  "Status
offense" means conduct subject to adjudication by the youth court that
would not be a crime if committed by an adult.
          (aa)  "Financially
able" means a parent or child who is ineligible for a court-appointed
attorney.
          (bb)  "Assessment"
means an individualized examination of a child to determine the child's
psychosocial needs and problems, including the type and extent of any mental
health, substance abuse or co-occurring mental health and substance abuse
disorders and recommendations for treatment.  The term includes, but is not
limited to, a drug and alcohol, psychological or psychiatric evaluation,
records review, clinical interview or the administration of a formal test and
instrument.
          (cc)  "Screening"
means a process, with or without the administration of a formal instrument, that
is designed to identify a child who is at increased risk of having mental
health, substance abuse or co-occurring mental health and substance abuse disorders
that warrant immediate attention, intervention or more comprehensive assessment.
          (dd)  "Durable legal
relative guardianship" means the legal status created by a youth court
order that conveys the physical and legal custody of a child or children by
durable legal guardianship to a relative or fictive kin who is licensed as a
foster or resource parent.
          (ee)  "Relative"
means a person related to the child by affinity or consanguinity within the
third degree.
          (ff)  "Fictive kin"
means a person not related to the child legally or biologically but who is
considered a relative due to a significant, familial-like and ongoing
relationship with the child and family.
          (gg)  "Reasonable
efforts" means the exercise of reasonable care and due diligence by the
Department of Human Services, the Department of Child Protection Services, or
any other appropriate entity or person to use appropriate and available
services to prevent the unnecessary removal of the child from the home or
provide other services related to meeting the needs of the child and the
parents.
          (hh)  "Commercial
sexual exploitation" means any sexual act or crime of a sexual nature,
which is committed against a child for financial or economic gain, to obtain a
thing of value for quid pro quo exchange of property or for any other purpose.
     SECTION 5.  Section
97-5-51, Mississippi Code of 1972, is amended as follows:
     97-5-51.  (1)  Definitions. 
For the purposes of this section:
          (a)  "Sex crime
against a minor" means any offense under at least one (1) of the
following statutes when committed by an adult against a minor who is under the
age of sixteen (16):  
              (i)  Section 97-3-65
relating to rape; 
              (ii)  Section 97-3-71
relating to rape and assault with intent to ravish;
              (iii)  Section 97-3-95
relating to sexual battery;
              (iv)  Section 97-5-23
relating to the touching of a child, mentally defective or incapacitated person
or physically helpless person for lustful purposes;
              (v)  Section 97-5-41
relating to the carnal knowledge of a stepchild, adopted child or child of a
cohabiting partner;
              (vi)  Section 97-5-33
relating to exploitation of children;
              (vii)  Section 97-3-54.1(1)(c)
relating to procuring sexual servitude of a minor;
              (viii)  Section 43-47-18
relating to sexual abuse of a vulnerable person;
              (ix)  Section 97-1-7
relating to the attempt to commit any of the offenses listed in this subsection;

              (x)  Section 97-29-51
relating to procuring sexual services of a minor; * * *and
              (xi)  Section 43-47-18
and Section 43-47-19 relating to sexual battery abuse of a vulnerable person
who is a minor * * *.;
and
               (xii)  Subsection
(1) of Section 3 of this act.
          (b)  "Mandatory
reporter" means any of the following individuals performing their
occupational duties:  health care practitioner, clergy member, teaching or
child care provider, law enforcement officer, or commercial image processor.
          (c)  "Health care
practitioner" means any individual who provides health care services,
including a physician, surgeon, physical therapist, psychiatrist, psychologist,
medical resident, medical intern, hospital staff member, licensed nurse, midwife
and emergency medical technician or paramedic.
          (d)  "Clergy
member" means any priest, rabbi or duly ordained deacon or minister.
          (e)  "Teaching or
child care provider" means anyone who provides training or supervision of
a minor under the age of sixteen (16), including a teacher, teacher's aide,
principal or staff member of a public or private school, social worker,
probation officer, foster home parent, group home or other child care
institutional staff member, personnel of residential home facilities, a
licensed or unlicensed day care provider.
          (f)  "Commercial
image processor" means any person who, for compensation:  (i) develops
exposed photographic film into negatives, slides or prints; (ii) makes prints
from negatives or slides; or (iii) processes or stores
digital media or images from any digital process, including, but not
limited to, website applications, photography, live streaming of video,
posting, creation of power points or any other means of intellectual property
communication or media including conversion or manipulation of still shots or
video into a digital show stored on a photography site or a media storage site.
          (g)  "Caretaker"
means any person legally obligated to provide or secure adequate care for a
minor under the age of sixteen (16), including a parent, guardian, tutor, legal
custodian or foster home parent.
     (2)  (a)  Mandatory
reporter requirement.  A mandatory reporter shall make a report if it would
be reasonable for the mandatory reporter to suspect that a sex crime against a
minor has occurred.
          (b)  Failure to file a
mandatory report shall be punished as provided in this section.
          (c)  Reports made under
this section and the identity of the mandatory reporter are confidential except
when the court determines the testimony of the person reporting to be material
to a judicial proceeding or when the identity of the reporter is released to
law enforcement agencies and the appropriate prosecutor.  The identity of the
reporting party shall not be disclosed to anyone other than law enforcement or
prosecutors except under court order; violation of this requirement is a
misdemeanor.  Reports made under this section are for the purpose of criminal
investigation and prosecution only and information from these reports is not a public
record.  Disclosure of any information by the prosecutor shall conform to the
Mississippi Uniform Rules of Circuit and County Court Procedure.
          (d)  Any mandatory
reporter who makes a required report under this section or participates in a judicial
proceeding resulting from a mandatory report shall be presumed to be acting in good
faith.  Any person or institution reporting in good faith shall be immune from
any liability, civil or criminal, that might otherwise be incurred or imposed.
     (3)  (a)  Mandatory
reporting procedure.  A report required under subsection (2) must be made
immediately to the law enforcement agency in whose jurisdiction the reporter
believes the sex crime against the minor occurred.  Except as otherwise
provided in this subsection (3), a mandatory reporter may not delegate to any
other person the responsibility to report, but shall make the report
personally.
              (i)  The reporting
requirement under this subsection (3) is satisfied if a mandatory reporter in
good faith reports a suspected sex crime against a minor to the Department of
Child Protection Services under Section 43-21-353.
              (ii)  The reporting
requirement under this subsection (3) is satisfied if a mandatory reporter
reports a suspected sex crime against a minor by following a reporting
procedure that is imposed:
                   1.  By state
agency rule as part of licensure of any person or entity holding a state
license to provide services that include the treatment or education of abused
or neglected children; or
                   2.  By statute.
          (b)  Contents of the
report.  The report shall identify, to the extent known to the reporter,
the following:
              (i)  The name and
address of the minor victim;
              (ii)  The name and
address of the minor's caretaker;
              (iii)  Any other
pertinent information known to the reporter.
     (4)  A law enforcement
officer who receives a mandated report under this section shall file an
affidavit against the offender on behalf of the State of Mississippi if there
is probable cause to believe that the offender has committed a sex crime
against a minor.
     (5)  Collection of
forensic samples.  (a)  (i)  When an abortion is performed on a minor who
is less than fourteen (14) years of age at the time of the abortion procedure,
fetal tissue extracted during the abortion shall be collected in accordance
with rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this section if it would be
reasonable to suspect that the pregnancy being terminated is the result of a
sex crime against a minor.
              (ii)  When a minor
who is under sixteen (16) years of age gives birth to an infant, umbilical cord
blood shall be collected, if possible, in accordance with rules and regulations
adopted pursuant to this section if it would be reasonable to suspect that the
minor's pregnancy resulted from a sex crime against a minor.
              (iii)  It shall be
reasonable to suspect that a sex crime against a minor has occurred if the
mother of an infant was less than sixteen (16) years of age at the time of
conception and at least one (1) of the following conditions also applies:
                   1.  The mother
of the infant will not identify the father of the infant;
                   2.  The mother
of the infant lists the father of the infant as unknown;
                   3.  The person
the mother identifies as the father of the infant disputes his fatherhood;
                   4.  The person
the mother identifies as the father of the infant is twenty-one (21) years of
age or older; or
                   5.  The person
the mother identifies as the father is deceased.
          (b)  The State Medical
Examiner shall adopt rules and regulations consistent with Section 99-49-1 that
prescribe:
              (i)  The amount and
type of fetal tissue or umbilical cord blood to be collected pursuant to
this section;
              (ii)  Procedures
for the proper preservation of the tissue or blood for the purpose of DNA testing
and examination;
              (iii)  Procedures
for documenting the chain of custody of such tissue or blood for use as
evidence;
              (iv)  Procedures
for proper disposal of fetal tissue or umbilical cord blood collected
pursuant to this section;
              (v)  A uniform reporting
instrument mandated to be utilized, which shall include the complete residence
address and name of the parent or legal guardian of the minor who is the
subject of the report required under this subsection (5); and
              (vi)  Procedures
for communication with law enforcement agencies regarding evidence and
information obtained pursuant to this section.
     (6)  Penalties. 
(a)  A person who is convicted of a first offense under this section shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and fined not more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00).
          (b)  A person who is
convicted of a second offense under this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and fined not more than One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00), or
imprisoned for not more than thirty (30) days, or both.
          (c)  A person who is
convicted of a third or subsequent offense under this section shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor and fined not more than Five Thousand Dollars ($5,000.00), or
imprisoned for not more than one (1) year, or both.
     (7)  A health care practitioner
or health care facility shall be immune from any penalty, civil or
criminal, for good-faith compliance with any rules and regulations adopted pursuant
to this section.
     SECTION 6.  Prohibition
on use of public funds or tax deduction for gender transition procedures.  (1)
 Public funds shall not be directly or indirectly used, granted, paid, or
distributed to any entity, organization, or individual that provides gender
transition procedures to a person under twenty-one (21) years of age.
     (2)  Health care services
furnished in the following situations shall not include gender transition
procedures for a person under twenty-one (21) years of age:
          (a)  By or in a health care
facility owned by the state or a county or local government; or
          (b)  By a physician or
other health care professional employed by the state or a county or local
government.
     (3)  Any amount paid by an
individual or an entity during a taxable year for provision of gender
transition procedures or as premiums for health care coverage that includes
coverage for gender transition procedures is not deductible under the state income
tax laws.
     SECTION 7.  Enforcement.
 (1)  Any referral for or provision of gender transition procedures to a person
under twenty-one (21) years of age by a physician or other health care professional
is unprofessional conduct and is subject to discipline by the appropriate
licensing entity for the health care professional.
     (2)  A person may assert an
actual or threatened violation of this act as a claim or defense in a judicial or
administrative proceeding and obtain compensatory damages, injunctive relief,
declaratory relief, or any other appropriate relief.
     (3)  (a)  A person must
bring a claim for a violation of this act no later than two (2) years after the
day the cause of action accrues.
          (b)  A person under twenty-one
(21) years of age may bring an action throughout their minority through a
parent or next friend, and may bring an action in their own name upon reaching
majority at any time from that point until twenty (20) years after reaching the
age of majority.
     (4)  Notwithstanding any
other provision of law, an action under this act may be commenced, and relief
may be granted, in a judicial proceeding without regard to whether the person
commencing the action has sought or exhausted available administrative remedies.
     (5)  In any action or
proceeding to enforce a provision of this act, a prevailing party who
establishes a violation of this act shall recover reasonable attorney's fees.
     (6)  (a)  The Attorney General
may bring an action to enforce compliance with this act.
          (b)  This act does not
deny, impair, or otherwise affect any right or authority of the Attorney
General, the State of Mississippi, or any agency, officer, or employee of the
state, acting under any law other than this act, to institute or intervene in
any proceeding.
     SECTION 8.  Section
27-7-17, Mississippi Code of 1972, is amended as follows:
     27-7-17.  In computing taxable
income, there shall be allowed as deductions:
     (1)  Business deductions.
          (a)  Business expenses. 
All the ordinary and necessary expenses paid or incurred during the taxable year
in carrying on any trade or business, including a reasonable allowance for salaries
or other compensation for personal services actually rendered; nonreimbursable traveling
expenses incident to current employment, including a reasonable amount expended
for meals and lodging while away from home in the pursuit of a trade or business;
and rentals or other payments required to be made as a condition of the continued
use or possession, for purposes of the trade or business of property to which the
taxpayer has not taken or is not taking title or in which he had no equity.  Expense
incurred in connection with earning and distributing nontaxable income is not an
allowable deduction.  Limitations on entertainment expenses shall conform to the
provisions of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.  There shall also be allowed a
deduction for expenses as provided in Section 41-137-51.
          (b)  Interest.  All
interest paid or accrued during the taxable year on business indebtedness, except
interest upon the indebtedness for the purchase of tax-free bonds, or any stocks,
the dividends from which are nontaxable under the provisions of this article; provided,
however, in the case of securities dealers, interest payments or accruals on loans,
the proceeds of which are used to purchase tax-exempt securities, shall be deductible
if income from otherwise tax-free securities is reported as income.  Investment
interest expense shall be limited to investment income.  Interest expense incurred
for the purchase of treasury stock, to pay dividends, or incurred as a result of
an undercapitalized affiliated corporation may not be deducted unless an ordinary
and necessary business purpose can be established to the satisfaction of the commissioner. 
For the purposes of this paragraph, the phrase "interest upon the indebtedness
for the purchase of tax-free bonds" applies only to the indebtedness incurred
for the purpose of directly purchasing tax-free bonds and does not apply to any
other indebtedness incurred in the regular course of the taxpayer's business.  Any
corporation, association, organization or other entity taxable under Section 27-7-23(c)
shall allocate interest expense as provided in Section 27-7-23(c)(3)(I).
          (c)  Taxes.  Taxes
paid or accrued within the taxable year, except state and federal income taxes,
excise taxes based on or measured by net income, estate and inheritance taxes, gift
taxes, cigar and cigarette taxes, gasoline taxes, and sales and use taxes unless
incurred as an item of expense in a trade or business or in the production of taxable
income.  In the case of an individual, taxes permitted as an itemized deduction
under the provisions of subsection (3)(a) of this section are to be claimed thereunder.
          (d)  Business losses.
              (i)  Losses sustained
during the taxable year not compensated for by insurance or otherwise, if incurred
in trade or business, or nonbusiness transactions entered into for profit.
               (ii)  Limitations on
losses from passive activities and rental real estate shall conform to the provisions
of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
          (e)  Bad debts. 
Losses from debts ascertained to be worthless and charged off during the taxable
year, if sustained in the conduct of the regular trade or business of the taxpayer;
provided, that such losses shall be allowed only when the taxpayer has reported
as income, on the accrual basis, the amount of such debt or account.
          (f)  Depreciation. 
A reasonable allowance for exhaustion, wear and tear of property used in the trade
or business, or rental property, and depreciation upon buildings based upon their
reasonable value as of March 16, 1912, if acquired prior thereto, and upon cost
if acquired subsequent to that date.  In the case of new or used aircraft, equipment,
engines, or other parts and tools used for aviation, allowance for bonus depreciation
conforms with the federal bonus depreciation rates and reasonable allowance for
depreciation under this section is no less than one hundred percent (100%). 
          (g)  Depletion. 
In the case of mines, oil and gas wells, other natural deposits and timber, a reasonable
allowance for depletion and for depreciation of improvements, based upon cost, including
cost of development, not otherwise deducted, or fair market value as of March 16,
1912, if acquired prior to that date, such allowance to be made upon regulations
prescribed by the commissioner, with the approval of the Governor.
          (h)  Contributions or
gifts.  Except as otherwise provided in paragraph (p) of this subsection or
subsection (3)(a) of this section for individuals, contributions or gifts made by
corporations within the taxable year to corporations, organizations, associations
or institutions, including Community Chest funds, foundations and trusts created
solely and exclusively for religious, charitable, scientific or educational purposes,
or for the prevention of cruelty to children or animals, no part of the net earnings
of which inure to the benefit of any private stockholder or individual.  This deduction
shall be allowed in an amount not to exceed twenty percent (20%) of the net income. 
Such contributions or gifts shall be allowable as deductions only if verified under
rules and regulations prescribed by the commissioner, with the approval of the Governor. 
Contributions made in any form other than cash shall be allowed as a deduction,
subject to the limitations herein provided, in an amount equal to the actual market
value of the contributions at the time the contribution is actually made and consummated.
          (i)  Reserve funds -
insurance companies.  In the case of insurance companies the net additions required
by law to be made within the taxable year to reserve funds when such reserve funds
are maintained for the purpose of liquidating policies at maturity.
          (j)  Annuity income. 
The sums, other than dividends, paid within the taxpayer year on policy or annuity
contracts when such income has been included in gross income.
          (k)  Contributions to
employee pension plans.  Contributions made by an employer to a plan or a trust
forming part of a pension plan, stock bonus plan, disability or death-benefit plan,
or profit-sharing plan of such employer for the exclusive benefit of some or all
of his, their, or its employees, or their beneficiaries, shall be deductible from
his, their, or its income only to the extent that, and for the taxable year in which,
the contribution is deductible for federal income tax purposes under the Internal
Revenue Code of 1986 and any other provisions of similar purport in the Internal
Revenue Laws of the United States, and the rules, regulations, rulings and determinations
promulgated thereunder, provided that:
              (i)  The plan or trust
be irrevocable.
               (ii)  The plan or trust
constitute a part of a pension plan, stock bonus plan, disability or death-benefit
plan, or profit-sharing plan for the exclusive benefit of some or all of the employer's
employees and/or officers, or their beneficiaries, for the purpose of distributing
the corpus and income of the plan or trust to such employees and/or officers, or
their beneficiaries.
              (iii)  No part of the
corpus or income of the plan or trust can be used for purposes other than for the
exclusive benefit of employees and/or officers, or their beneficiaries.
     Contributions to all plans or
to all trusts of real or personal property (or real and personal property combined)
or to insured plans created under a retirement plan for which provision has been
made under the laws of the United States of America, making such contributions deductible
from income for federal income tax purposes, shall be deductible only to the same
extent under the Income Tax Laws of the State of Mississippi.
          (l)  Net operating loss
carrybacks and carryovers.  A net operating loss for any taxable year ending
after December 31, 1993, and taxable years thereafter, shall be a net operating
loss carryback to each of the three (3) taxable years preceding the taxable year
of the loss.  If the net operating loss for any taxable year is not exhausted by
carrybacks to the three (3) taxable years preceding the taxable year of the loss,
then there shall be a net operating loss carryover to each of the fifteen (15) taxable
years following the taxable year of the loss beginning with any taxable year after
December 31, 1991.
     For any taxable year ending after
December 31, 1997, the period for net operating loss carrybacks and net operating
loss carryovers shall be the same as those established by the Internal Revenue Code
and the rules, regulations, rulings and determinations promulgated thereunder as
in effect at the taxable year end or on December 31, 2000, whichever is earlier.
     A net operating loss for any
taxable year ending after December 31, 2001, and taxable years thereafter, shall
be a net operating loss carryback to each of the two (2) taxable years preceding
the taxable year of the loss.  If the net operating loss for any taxable year is
not exhausted by carrybacks to the two (2) taxable years preceding the taxable year
of the loss, then there shall be a net operating loss carryover to each of the twenty
(20) taxable years following the taxable year of the loss beginning with any taxable
year after the taxable year of the loss.
     The term "net operating
loss," for the purposes of this paragraph, shall be the excess of the deductions
allowed over the gross income; provided, however, the following deductions shall
not be allowed in computing same:
               (i)  No net operating
loss deduction shall be allowed.
              (ii)  No personal exemption
deduction shall be allowed.
              (iii)  Allowable deductions
which are not attributable to taxpayer's trade or business shall be allowed only
to the extent of the amount of gross income not derived from such trade or business.
     Any taxpayer entitled to a carryback
period as provided by this paragraph may elect to relinquish the entire carryback
period with respect to a net operating loss for any taxable year ending after December
31, 1991.  The election shall be made in the manner prescribed by the Department
of Revenue and shall be made by the due date, including extensions of time, for
filing the taxpayer's return for the taxable year of the net operating loss for
which the election is to be in effect.  The election, once made for any taxable
year, shall be irrevocable for that taxable year.
          (m)  Amortization of
pollution or environmental control facilities.  Allowance of deduction.  Every
taxpayer, at his election, shall be entitled to a deduction for pollution or environmental
control facilities to the same extent as that allowed under the Internal Revenue
Code and the rules, regulations, rulings and determinations promulgated thereunder.
          (n)  Dividend distributions
- real estate investment trusts.  "Real estate investment trust" (hereinafter
referred to as REIT) shall have the meaning ascribed to such term in Section 856
of the federal Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended.  A REIT is allowed a dividend
distributed deduction if the dividend distributions meet the requirements of Section
857 or are otherwise deductible under Section 858 or 860, federal Internal Revenue
Code of 1986, as amended.  In addition:
              (i)  A dividend distributed
deduction shall only be allowed for dividends paid by a publicly traded REIT.  A
qualified REIT subsidiary shall be allowed a dividend distributed deduction if its
owner is a publicly traded REIT.
              (ii)  Income generated
from real estate contributed or sold to a REIT by a shareholder or related party
shall not give rise to a dividend distributed deduction, unless the shareholder
or related party would have received the dividend distributed deduction under this
chapter.
              (iii)  A holding corporation
receiving a dividend from a REIT shall not be allowed the deduction in Section 27-7-15(4)(t).
              (iv)  Any REIT not allowed
the dividend distributed deduction in the federal Internal Revenue Code of 1986,
as amended, shall not be allowed a dividend distributed deduction under this chapter.
     The commissioner is authorized
to promulgate rules and regulations consistent with the provisions in Section 269
of the federal Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, so as to prevent the evasion
or avoidance of state income tax.
          (o)  Contributions to
college savings trust fund accounts.  Contributions or payments to a Mississippi
Affordable College Savings Program account are deductible as provided under Section
37-155-113.  Payments made under a prepaid tuition contract entered into under the
Mississippi Prepaid Affordable College Tuition Program are deductible as provided
under Section 37-155-17.
          (p)  Contributions of
human pharmaceutical products.  To the extent that a "major supplier"
as defined in Section 27-13-13(2)(d) contributes human pharmaceutical products in
excess of Two Hundred Fifty Million Dollars ($250,000,000.00) as determined under
Section 170 of the Internal Revenue Code, the charitable contribution limitation
associated with those donations shall follow the federal limitation but cannot result
in the Mississippi net income being reduced below zero.
          (q)  Contributions to
ABLE trust fund accounts.  Contributions or payments to a Mississippi Achieving
a Better Life Experience (ABLE) Program account are deductible as provided under
Section 43-28-13.
     (2)  Restrictions on the deductibility
of certain intangible expenses and interest expenses with a related member.
          (a)  As used in this subsection
(2):
              (i)  "Intangible
expenses and costs" include:
                   1.  Expenses, losses
and costs for, related to, or in connection directly or indirectly with the direct
or indirect acquisition, use, maintenance or management, ownership, sale, exchange
or any other disposition of intangible property to the extent such amounts are allowed
as deductions or costs in determining taxable income under this chapter;
                   2.  Expenses or
losses related to or incurred in connection directly or indirectly with factoring
transactions or discounting transactions;
                    3.  Royalty, patent,
technical and copyright fees;
                   4.  Licensing fees;
and 
                   5.  Other similar
expenses and costs.
               (ii)  "Intangible
property" means patents, patent applications, trade names, trademarks, service
marks, copyrights and similar types of intangible assets.
              (iii)  "Interest
expenses and cost" means amounts directly or indirectly allowed as deductions
for purposes of determining taxable income under this chapter to the extent such
interest expenses and costs are directly or indirectly for, related to, or in connection
with the direct or indirect acquisition, maintenance, management, ownership, sale,
exchange or disposition of intangible property.
              (iv)  "Related
member" means an entity or person that, with respect to the taxpayer during
all or any portion of the taxable year, is a related entity, a component member
as defined in the Internal Revenue Code, or is an entity or a person to or from
whom there is attribution of stock ownership in accordance with Section 1563(e)
of the Internal Revenue Code.
               (v)  "Related
entity" means:
                   1.  A stockholder
who is an individual or a member of the stockholder's family, as defined in regulations
prescribed by the commissioner, if the stockholder and the members of the stockholder's
family own, directly, indirectly, beneficially or constructively, in the aggregate,
at least fifty percent (50%) of the value of the taxpayer's outstanding stock;
                   2.  A stockholder,
or a stockholder's partnership, limited liability company, estate, trust or corporation,
if the stockholder and the stockholder's partnerships, limited liability companies,
estates, trusts and corporations own, directly, indirectly, beneficially or constructively,
in the aggregate, at least fifty percent (50%) of the value of the taxpayer's outstanding
stock;
                   3.  A corporation,
or a party related to the corporation in a manner that would require an attribution
of stock from the corporation to the party or from the party to the corporation,
if the taxpayer owns, directly, indirectly, beneficially or constructively, at least
fifty percent (50%) of the value of the corporation's outstanding stock under regulation
prescribed by the commissioner;
                   4.  Any entity
or person which would be a related member under this section if the taxpayer were
considered a corporation for purposes of this section.
          (b)  In computing net income,
a taxpayer shall add back otherwise deductible interest expenses and costs and intangible
expenses and costs directly or indirectly paid, accrued to or incurred, in connection
directly or indirectly with one or more direct or indirect transactions with one
or more related members.
          (c)  The adjustments required
by this subsection shall not apply to such portion of interest expenses and costs
and intangible expenses and costs that the taxpayer can establish meets one (1)
of the following:
              (i)  The related member
directly or indirectly paid, accrued or incurred such portion to a person during
the same income year who is not a related member; or
              (ii)  The transaction
giving rise to the interest expenses and costs or intangible expenses and costs
between the taxpayer and related member was done primarily for a valid business
purpose other than the avoidance of taxes, and the related member is not primarily
engaged in the acquisition, use, maintenance or management, ownership, sale, exchange
or any other disposition of intangible property.
          (d)  Nothing in this subsection
shall require a taxpayer to add to its net income more than once any amount of interest
expenses and costs or intangible expenses and costs that the taxpayer pays, accrues
or incurs to a related member.
          (e)  The commissioner may
prescribe such regulations as necessary or appropriate to carry out the purposes
of this subsection, including, but not limited to, clarifying definitions of terms,
rules of stock attribution, factoring and discount transactions.
     (3)  Individual nonbusiness
deductions.
          (a)  The amount allowable
for individual nonbusiness itemized deductions for federal income tax purposes where
the individual is eligible to elect, for the taxable year, to itemize deductions
on his federal return except the following:
              (i)  The deduction for
state income taxes paid or other taxes allowed for federal purposes in lieu of state
income taxes paid;
              (ii)  The deduction
for gaming losses from gaming establishments;
              (iii)  The deduction
for taxes collected by licensed gaming establishments pursuant to Section
27-7-901;
              (iv)  The deduction
for taxes collected by gaming establishments pursuant to Section 27-7-903 * * *.; and
               (v)  The deduction
for medical expenses for the provision of puberty-blocking drugs, cross-sex hormones,
gender transition procedures or gender reassignment surgery as defined in Section
2 of this act.
          (b)  In lieu of the individual
nonbusiness itemized deductions authorized in paragraph (a), for all purposes other
than ordinary and necessary expenses paid or incurred during the taxable year in
carrying on any trade or business, an optional standard deduction of:
              (i)  Three Thousand
Four Hundred Dollars ($3,400.00) through calendar year 1997, Four Thousand Two Hundred
Dollars ($4,200.00) for the calendar year 1998 and Four Thousand Six Hundred Dollars
($4,600.00) for each calendar year thereafter in the case of married individuals
filing a joint or combined return;
              (ii)  One Thousand Seven
Hundred Dollars ($1,700.00) through calendar year 1997, Two Thousand One Hundred
Dollars ($2,100.00) for the calendar year 1998 and Two Thousand Three Hundred Dollars
($2,300.00) for each calendar year thereafter in the case of married individuals
filing separate returns;
              (iii)  Three Thousand
Four Hundred Dollars ($3,400.00) in the case of a head of family; or
               (iv)  Two Thousand
Three Hundred Dollars ($2,300.00) in the case of an individual who is not married.
     In the case of a husband and
wife living together, having separate incomes, and filing combined returns, the
standard deduction authorized may be divided in any manner they choose.  In the
case of separate returns by a husband and wife, the standard deduction shall not
be allowed to either if the taxable income of one of the spouses is determined without
regard to the standard deduction.
          (c)  A nonresident individual
shall be allowed the same individual nonbusiness deductions as are authorized for
resident individuals in paragraph (a) or (b) of this subsection; however, the nonresident
individual is entitled only to that proportion of the individual nonbusiness deductions
as his net income from sources within the State of Mississippi bears to his total
or entire net income from all sources.
     (4)  Nothing in this section
shall permit the same item to be deducted more than once, either in fact or in effect.
     (5)  Notwithstanding any other
provision in Title 27, Mississippi Code of 1972, there shall be allowed an income
tax deduction for otherwise deductible expenses if:
          (a)  The payment(s) for
such deductible expenses are made with the grant or loan program of the Paycheck
Protection Program as authorized under (i) the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic
Security (CARES) Act and the Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2021, (ii) the COVID-19
Economic Injury Disaster Loan Program, (iii) the 2020 COVID-19 Mississippi Business
Assistance Act, (iv) the Rental Assistance Grant Program, (v) the Shuttered Venue
Operators Grant Program and Restaurant Revitalization Fund authorized by the Economic
Aid to Hard-Hit Small Businesses, Nonprofits, and Venues Act, and amended by the
federal American Rescue Plan Act, and/or (vi) the Mississippi Agriculture Stabilization
Act; and
          (b)  Such deductible expenses
shall be allowed as deductions for federal income tax purposes.
     SECTION 9.  The
following shall be codified as Section 43-13-117.7, Mississippi Code of 1972:
     43-13-117.7.  Notwithstanding
any other provisions of Section 43-13-117, the division shall not reimburse or
provide coverage for gender transition procedures for a person under twenty-one
(21) years of age.  As used in this section, the term "gender transition
procedures" means the same as defined in Section 3 of this act.
     SECTION 10.  Section
73-15-29, Mississippi Code of 1972, is amended as follows:
     73-15-29.  (1)  The board shall
have power to revoke, suspend or refuse to renew any license issued by the board,
or to revoke or suspend any privilege to practice, or to deny an application for
a license, or to fine, place on probation and/or discipline a licensee, in any manner
specified in this article, upon proof that such person:
          (a)  Has committed fraud
or deceit in securing or attempting to secure such license;
          (b)  Has been convicted
of a felony, or a crime involving moral turpitude or has had accepted by a court
a plea of nolo contendere to a felony or a crime involving moral turpitude (a certified
copy of the judgment of the court of competent jurisdiction of such conviction or
pleas shall be prima facie evidence of such conviction);
          (c)  Has negligently or
willfully acted in a manner inconsistent with the health or safety of the persons
under the licensee's care;
          (d)  Has had a license or
privilege to practice as a registered nurse or a licensed practical nurse suspended
or revoked in any jurisdiction, has voluntarily surrendered such license or privilege
to practice in any jurisdiction, has been placed on probation as a registered nurse
or licensed practical nurse in any jurisdiction or has been placed under a disciplinary
order(s) in any manner as a registered nurse or licensed practical nurse in any
jurisdiction, (a certified copy of the order of suspension, revocation, probation
or disciplinary action shall be prima facie evidence of such action);
          (e)  Has negligently or
willfully practiced nursing in a manner that fails to meet generally accepted standards
of such nursing practice;
          (f)  Has negligently or
willfully violated any order, rule or regulation of the board pertaining to nursing
practice or licensure;
          (g)  Has falsified or in
a repeatedly negligent manner made incorrect entries or failed to make essential
entries on records;
          (h)  Is addicted to or dependent
on alcohol or other habit-forming drugs or is a habitual user of narcotics, barbiturates,
amphetamines, hallucinogens, or other drugs having similar effect, or has misappropriated
any medication;
          (i)  Has a physical, mental
or emotional condition that renders the licensee unable to perform nursing services
or duties with reasonable skill and safety;
          (j)  Has engaged in any
other conduct, whether of the same or of a different character from that specified
in this article, that would constitute a crime as defined in Title 97 of the Mississippi
Code of 1972, as now or hereafter amended, and that relates to such person's employment
as a registered nurse or licensed practical nurse;
          (k)  Engages in conduct
likely to deceive, defraud or harm the public;
          (l)  Engages in any unprofessional
conduct as identified by the board in its rules;
          (m)  Has violated any provision
of this article; * * *or
          (n)  Violation(s) of the
provisions of Sections 41-121-1 through 41-121-9 relating to deceptive advertisement
by health care practitioners.  This paragraph shall stand repealed on July 1, 2025 * * *.; or
          (o)  Violation(s) of
any provision of Sections 1 through 6 of this act.
     (2)  When the board finds any
person unqualified because of any of the grounds set forth in subsection (1) of
this section, it may enter an order imposing one or more of the following penalties:
          (a)  Denying application
for a license or other authorization to practice nursing or practical nursing;
          (b)  Administering a reprimand;
          (c)  Suspending or restricting
the license or other authorization to practice as a registered nurse or licensed
practical nurse for up to two (2) years without review;
          (d)  Revoking the license
or other authorization to practice nursing or practical nursing;
          (e)  Requiring the disciplinee
to submit to care, counseling or treatment by persons and/or agencies approved or
designated by the board as a condition for initial, continued or renewed licensure
or other authorization to practice nursing or practical nursing;
          (f)  Requiring the disciplinee
to participate in a program of education prescribed by the board as a condition
for initial, continued or renewed licensure or other authorization to practice;
          (g)  Requiring the disciplinee
to practice under the supervision of a registered nurse for a specified period of
time; or
          (h)  Imposing a fine not
to exceed Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00).
     (3)  In addition to the grounds
specified in subsection (1) of this section, the board shall be authorized to suspend
the license or privilege to practice of any licensee for being out of compliance
with an order for support, as defined in Section 93-11-153.  The procedure for suspension
of a license or privilege to practice for being out of compliance with an order
for support, and the procedure for the reissuance or reinstatement of a license
or privilege to practice suspended for that purpose, and the payment of any fees
for the reissuance or reinstatement of a license or privilege to practice suspended
for that purpose, shall be governed by Section 93-11-157 or 93-11-163, as the case
may be.  If there is any conflict between any provision of Section 93-11-157 or
93-11-163 and any provision of this article, the provisions of Section 93-11-157
or 93-11-163, as the case may be, shall control.
     (4)  If the public health, safety
or welfare imperatively requires emergency action and the board incorporates a finding
to that effect in an order, the board may order summary suspension of a license
pending proceedings for revocation or other action.  These proceedings shall be
promptly instituted and determined by the board.
     (5)  The board may establish
by rule an alternative to discipline program for licensees who have an impairment
as a result of substance abuse or a mental health condition, which program shall
include at least the following components:
          (a)  Participation in the
program is voluntary with the licensee, and the licensee must enter the program
before the board holds a disciplinary action hearing regarding the licensee;
          (b)  The full cost of participation
in the program, including the cost of any care, counseling, treatment and/or education
received by the licensee, shall be borne by the licensee;
          (c)  All of the procedures
and records regarding the licensee's participation in the program shall be confidential,
shall not be disclosed and shall be exempt from the provisions of the Mississippi
Public Records Act of 1983; and
          (d)  A licensee may not
participate in the program more often than one (1) time during any period of five
(5) years or such longer period as set by the board.
     (6)  A nurse practitioner who
provides a written certification as authorized under the Mississippi Medical Cannabis
Act and in compliance with rules and regulations adopted thereunder shall not be
subject to any disciplinary action under this section solely due to providing the
written certification.
     SECTION 11.  Section
73-25-29, Mississippi Code of 1972, is amended as follows:
     73-25-29.  The grounds for the
nonissuance, suspension, revocation or restriction of a license or the denial of
reinstatement or renewal of a license are:
          (1)  Habitual personal use
of narcotic drugs, or any other drug having addiction-forming or addiction-sustaining
liability.
          (2)  Habitual use of intoxicating
liquors, or any beverage, to an extent which affects professional competency.
          (3)  Administering, dispensing
or prescribing any narcotic drug, or any other drug having addiction-forming or
addiction-sustaining liability otherwise than in the course of legitimate professional
practice.
          (4)  Conviction of violation
of any federal or state law regulating the possession, distribution or use of any
narcotic drug or any drug considered a controlled substance under state or federal
law, a certified copy of the conviction order or judgment rendered by the trial
court being prima facie evidence thereof, notwithstanding the pendency of any appeal.
          (5)  Procuring, or attempting
to procure, or aiding in, an abortion that is not medically indicated.
          (6)  Conviction of a felony
or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, a certified copy of the conviction order
or judgment rendered by the trial court being prima facie evidence thereof, notwithstanding
the pendency of any appeal.
          (7)  Obtaining or attempting
to obtain a license by fraud or deception.
          (8)  Unprofessional conduct,
which includes, but is not limited to:
              (a)  Practicing medicine
under a false or assumed name or impersonating another practitioner, living or dead.
              (b)  Knowingly performing
any act which in any way assists an unlicensed person to practice medicine.
               (c)  Making or willfully
causing to be made any flamboyant claims concerning the licensee's professional
excellence.
              (d)  Being guilty of
any dishonorable or unethical conduct likely to deceive, defraud or harm the public.
              (e)  Obtaining a fee
as personal compensation or gain from a person on fraudulent representation of a
disease or injury condition generally considered incurable by competent medical
authority in the light of current scientific knowledge and practice can be cured
or offering, undertaking, attempting or agreeing to cure or treat the same by a
secret method, which he refuses to divulge to the board upon request.
              (f)  Use of any false,
fraudulent or forged statement or document, or the use of any fraudulent, deceitful,
dishonest or immoral practice in connection with any of the licensing requirements,
including the signing in his professional capacity any certificate that is known
to be false at the time he makes or signs such certificate.
              (g)  Failing to identify
a physician's school of practice in all professional uses of his name by use of
his earned degree or a description of his school of practice.
          (9)  The refusal of a licensing
authority of another state or jurisdiction to issue or renew a license, permit or
certificate to practice medicine in that jurisdiction or the revocation, suspension
or other restriction imposed on a license, permit or certificate issued by such
licensing authority which prevents or restricts practice in that jurisdiction, a
certified copy of the disciplinary order or action taken by the other state or jurisdiction
being prima facie evidence thereof, notwithstanding the pendency of any appeal.
          (10)  Surrender of a license
or authorization to practice medicine in another state or jurisdiction or surrender
of membership on any medical staff or in any medical or professional association
or society while under disciplinary investigation by any of those authorities or
bodies for acts or conduct similar to acts or conduct which would constitute grounds
for action as defined in this section.
          (11)  Final sanctions imposed
by the United States Department of Health and Human Services, Office of Inspector
General or any successor federal agency or office, based upon a finding of incompetency,
gross misconduct or failure to meet professionally recognized standards of health
care; a certified copy of the notice of final sanction being prima facie evidence
thereof.  As used in this paragraph, the term "final sanction" means the
written notice to a physician from the United States Department of Health and Human
Services, Officer of Inspector General or any successor federal agency or office,
which implements the exclusion.
          (12)  Failure to furnish
the board, its investigators or representatives information legally requested by
the board.
          (13)  Violation of any provision(s)
of the Medical Practice Act or the rules and regulations of the board or of any
order, stipulation or agreement with the board.
          (14)  Violation(s) of the
provisions of Sections 41-121-1 through 41-121-9 relating to deceptive advertisement
by health care practitioners.
          (15)  Performing or inducing
an abortion on a woman in violation of any provision of Sections 41-41-131 through
41-41-145.
          (16)  Performing an abortion
on a pregnant woman after determining that the unborn human individual that the
pregnant woman is carrying has a detectable fetal heartbeat as provided in Section
41-41-34.1.
          (17)  Violation(s) of
any provision of Sections 1 through 6 of this act.
     In addition to the grounds specified
above, the board shall be authorized to suspend the license of any licensee for
being out of compliance with an order for support, as defined in Section 93-11-153. 
The procedure for suspension of a license for being out of compliance with an order
for support, and the procedure for the reissuance or reinstatement of a license
suspended for that purpose, and the payment of any fees for the reissuance or reinstatement
of a license suspended for that purpose, shall be governed by Section 93-11-157
or 93-11-163, as the case may be.  If there is any conflict between any provision
of Section 93-11-157 or 93-11-163 and any provision of this chapter, the provisions
of Section 93-11-157 or 93-11-163, as the case may be, shall control. 
     A physician who provides a written
certification as authorized under the Mississippi Medical Cannabis Act and in compliance
with rules and regulations adopted thereunder shall not be subject to any disciplinary
action under this section solely due to providing the written certification.
     SECTION 12.  Section
83-9-22, Mississippi Code of 1972, is amended as follows:
     83-9-22.  (1)  (a)  Notwithstanding
any other provision of the law to the contrary, except as otherwise provided in
subsections (3) and (4) of this section, no health coverage plan shall
restrict coverage for medically appropriate treatment prescribed by a physician
and agreed to by a fully informed insured, or if the insured lacks legal capacity
to consent by a person who has legal authority to consent on his or her behalf,
based on an insured's diagnosis with a terminal condition.  Refusing to pay for
treatment rendered to an insured near the end of life that is consistent with best
practices for treatment of a disease or condition, approved uses of a drug or device,
or uses supported by peer reviewed medical literature, is a per se violation of
this section.
          (b)  Violations of this
section shall constitute an unfair trade practice and subject the violator to the
penalties provided by law.
          (c)  As used in this section
"terminal condition" means any aggressive malignancy, chronic end-stage
cardiovascular or cerebral vascular disease, or any other disease, illness or condition
which a physician diagnoses as terminal.
          (d)  As used in this section,
a "health coverage plan" shall mean any hospital, health or medical expense
insurance policy, hospital or medical service contract, employee welfare benefit
plan, contract or agreement with a health maintenance organization or a preferred
provider organization, health and accident insurance policy, or any other insurance
contract of this type, including a group insurance plan and the State Health and
Life Insurance Plan.
     (2)  (a)  Notwithstanding any
other provision of the law to the contrary, no health benefit paid directly or indirectly
with state funds, specifically Medicaid, shall restrict coverage for medically appropriate
treatment prescribed by a physician and agreed to by a fully informed individual,
or if the individual lacks legal capacity to consent by a person who has legal authority
to consent on his or her behalf, based on an individual's diagnosis with a terminal
condition.
          (b)  Refusing to pay for
treatment rendered to an individual near the end of life that is consistent with
best practices for treatment of a disease or condition, approved uses of a drug
or device, or uses supported by peer reviewed medical literature, is a per se violation
of this section.
          (c)  As used in this section
"terminal condition" means any aggressive malignancy, chronic end-stage
cardiovascular or cerebral vascular disease, or any other disease, illness or condition
which a physician diagnoses as terminal. 
     (3)  This section does not require
a health coverage plan to cover and pay for the treatment of a person who is a cardholder
and registered qualifying patient with medical cannabis that is lawful under the
Mississippi Medical Cannabis Act and in compliance with rules and regulations adopted
thereunder.
     (4)  This section does not
require a health coverage plan to provide coverage for gender transition
procedures for a person under twenty-one (21) years of age.  As used in this
section, the term "gender transition procedures" means the same as
defined in Section 3 of this act.
     SECTION 13.  The
following shall be codified as Section 83-9-37, Mississippi Code of 1972:
     83-9-37.  (1)  As
used in this section, the term "gender transition procedures" means
the same as defined in Section 3 of this act.
     (2)  A health benefit plan
under an insurance policy or other plan providing health care coverage in this
state shall not include reimbursement for gender transition procedures for a person
under twenty-one (21) years of age.
     (3)  A health benefit plan
under an insurance policy or other plan providing health care coverage in this
state is not required to provide coverage for gender transition procedures for
a person under twenty-one (21) years of age.
     SECTION 14.  Section
11-46-5, Mississippi Code of 1972, is amended as follows:
     11-46-5.  (1) 
Notwithstanding the immunity granted in Section 11-46-3, or the provisions of
any other law to the contrary, the immunity of the state and its political
subdivisions from claims for money damages arising out of the torts of such
governmental entities and the torts of their employees while acting within the
course and scope of their employment is hereby waived from and after July 1,
1993, as to the state, and from and after October 1, 1993, as to political subdivisions;
provided, however, immunity of a governmental entity in any such case shall be
waived only to the extent of the maximum amount of liability provided for in
Section 11-46-15.
     (2)  For the purposes of
this chapter an employee shall not be considered as acting within the course and
scope of his employment and a governmental entity shall not be liable or be
considered to have waived immunity for any conduct of its employee if the
employee's conduct constituted fraud, malice, libel, slander, defamation or any
criminal offense other than traffic violations.
     (3)  For the purposes of
this chapter and not otherwise, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that any
act or omission of an employee within the time and at the place of his
employment is within the course and scope of his employment, except for actions
described in subsection (2) of Section 73-25-33 and subsection (5) of this section.
     (4)  Nothing contained in
this chapter shall be construed to waive the immunity of the state from suit in
federal courts guaranteed by the Eleventh Amendment to the Constitution of the
United States.
     (5)  For purposes of this
chapter, an employee shall not be considered as acting within the course and
scope of his or her employment and a governmental entity shall be liable or be considered
to have waived immunity for any conduct of its employee if the employee's
conduct constituted a violation of subsection (1) of Section 2 of this act.
     SECTION 15.  Section
11-1-60, Mississippi Code of 1972, is amended as follows:
     11-1-60.  (1) 
For the purposes of this section, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings ascribed herein unless the context clearly requires otherwise:
          (a)  "Noneconomic
damages" means subjective, nonpecuniary damages arising from death, pain,
suffering, inconvenience, mental anguish, worry, emotional distress, loss of
society and companionship, loss of consortium, bystander injury, physical
impairment, disfigurement, injury to reputation, humiliation, embarrassment,
loss of the enjoyment of life, hedonic damages, other nonpecuniary damages, and
any other theory of damages such as fear of loss, illness or injury.  The term "noneconomic
damages" shall not include punitive or exemplary damages.
          (b)  "Actual
economic damages" means objectively verifiable pecuniary damages arising
from medical expenses and medical care, rehabilitation services, custodial
care, disabilities, loss of earnings and earning capacity, loss of income,
burial costs, loss of use of property, costs of repair or replacement of
property, costs of obtaining substitute domestic services, loss of employment,
loss of business or employment opportunities, and other objectively verifiable
monetary losses.
     (2)  (a)  In any cause of
action filed on or after September 1, 2004, for injury based on malpractice or
breach of standard of care against a provider of health care, including institutions
for the aged or infirm, in the event the trier of fact finds the defendant
liable, they shall not award the plaintiff more than Five Hundred Thousand
Dollars ($500,000.00) for noneconomic damages.
          (b)  In any civil
action filed on or after September 1, 2004, other than those actions described
in paragraph (a) of this subsection, in the event the trier of fact finds the
defendant liable, they shall not award the plaintiff more than One Million
Dollars ($1,000,000.00) for noneconomic damages.
     It is the intent of this
section to limit all noneconomic damages to the above.
          (c)  The trier of fact
shall not be advised of the limitations imposed by this subsection (2) and the
judge shall appropriately reduce any award of noneconomic damages that exceeds the
applicable limitation.
     (3)  Nothing contained in
subsection (1) of this section shall be construed as creating a cause of action
or as setting forth elements of or types of damages that are or are not
recoverable in any type of cause of action.
     (4)  The statutory limits
provided in this section shall not be applied in favor of any provider of healthcare
who violates subsection (1) of Section 2 of this act for any claim that arises or
is brought on or after July 1, 2023.
     SECTION 16.  This act
shall take effect and be in force from and after July 1, 2023.




