


 



 


 

		By: Toth
H.B. No. 631




 


 



 		
			

A BILL TO BE ENTITLED




 
			

AN ACT




 
			
relating to parental rights in education.



 
			
       BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF TEXAS:



 
			
       SECTION 1.  Chapter 26, Education Code, is amended by adding 



 
			
Section 26.016 to read as follows:



 
			
       Sec. 26.016.  PARENTAL RIGHTS AND REMEDIES



 
			
       (a)  The Texas Education Agency shall adopt procedures for 



 
			
notifying a student's parent if there is a change in the student's  



 
			
services or monitoring related to the student's mental, emotional, 



 
			
or physical health or well-being and the school's ability to 



 
			
provide a safe and supportive learning environment for the student.  



 
			
The procedures must reinforce the fundamental right of parents to 



 
			
make decisions regarding the upbringing and control of their 



 
			
children by requiring school district personnel to encourage a 



 
			
student to discuss issues relating to his or her well-being with his 



 
			
or her parent or to facilitate discussion of the issue with the 



 
			
parent.  The procedures may not prohibit parents from accessing any 



 
			
of their student's education and health records created, 



 
			
maintained, or used by the school district.



 
			
       (b)  At the beginning of the school year, each school 



 
			
district shall notify parents of each healthcare service offered at 



 
			
their student's school and the option to withhold consent or 



 
			
decline any specific service.  Parental consent to a health care 



 
			
service does  not waive the parent's right to access his or her 



 
			
student's educational or health records or to be notified about a 



 
			
change in his or her student's services or monitoring as provided by 



 
			
this section.



 
			
       (c)  Before administering a student well-being questionnaire 



 
			
or health screening form to a student in kindergarten through grade 



 
			
5, the school district must provide the questionnaire or health 



 
			
screening form to the parent and obtain the permission of the 



 
			
parent.



 
			
       (d)  Each school district shall adopt procedures for a parent  



 
			
to notify the principal, or his or her designee, regarding concerns  



 
			
under this section at his or her student's school and the process 



 
			
for resolving those concerns within 7 calendar days after 



 
			
notification by the parent.



 
			
             (1)  At a minimum, the procedures must require that 



 
			
within 30 days after notification by the parent that the concern 



 
			
remains  unresolved, the school district must either resolve the 



 
			
concern or provide a statement of the reasons for not resolving the 



 
			
concern.



 
			
             (2)  If a concern is not resolved by the school 



 
			
district, a parent may:



 
			
                   (A)  Request the Commissioner of Education to 



 
			
appoint a special magistrate who is a member of the State Bar of 



 
			
Texas in good standing and who has at least 5 years' experience in 



 
			
administrative law.  The special magistrate shall determine facts 



 
			
relating to the dispute over the school district procedure or 



 
			
practice, consider information provided by the school district, and 



 
			
render a recommended decision for resolution to the State Board of 



 
			
Education within 30 days after receipt of the request by the parent.  



 
			
The State Board of Education must approve or reject the  recommended 



 
			
decision at its next regularly scheduled meeting that is more than 7 



 
			
calendar days and no more than 30 days after the date the 



 
			
recommended decision is transmitted.  The costs of the special 



 
			
magistrate shall be borne by the school district.  The State Board 



 
			
of Education shall adopt rules, including forms, necessary to 



 
			
implement this subsection.



 
			
                   (B)  Bring an action against the school district 



 
			
to obtain a declaratory judgment that the school district procedure 



 
			
or practice violates this section and seek injunctive relief.  A 



 
			
court may award damages and shall award reasonable attorney fees 



 
			
and court costs to a parent who receives declaratory or injunctive 



 
			
relief.



 
			
             (3)  Each school district shall adopt policies to 



 
			
notify parents of the procedures required under this subsection.



 
			
       SECTION 2.  By June 30, 2024, the Texas Education Agency 



 
			
shall review and update, as necessary, school counseling frameworks 



 
			
and standards; educator practices and professional conduct 



 
			
principles; and any other student services personnel guidelines, 



 
			
standards, or frameworks in accordance with the requirements of 



 
			
this act.



 
			
       SECTION 3.  Section 28.004, Education Code, is amended by 



 
			
amending subsection (i-3) and adding subsection (i-4) to read as 



 
			
follows:



 
			
       (i-3)  A school district may not adopt procedures or student 



 
			
support forms that prohibit school district personnel from 



 
			
notifying a parent about his or her student's mental, emotional, or 



 
			
physical health or well-being, or a change in related services or 



 
			
monitoring, or that encourage or have the effect of encouraging a 



 
			
student to withhold from a parent such information.  School 



 
			
district personnel may not discourage or prohibit parental  



 
			
notification of and involvement in critical decisions affecting a 



 
			
student's mental, emotional, or physical health or well-being.



 
			
[Subsection (i-2) and this subsection expire August 1, 2024.]



 
			
       (i-4)  Classroom instruction by school personnel or third 



 
			
parties on sexual orientation or gender identity may not occur in 



 
			
kindergarten through grade 5 or in a manner that is not age 



 
			
appropriate or developmentally appropriate for students in 



 
			
accordance with state standards.



 
			
       SECTION 4.  This Act takes effect immediately if it receives 



 
			
a vote of two-thirds of all the members elected to each house, as 



 
			
provided by Section 39, Article III, Texas Constitution.  If this 



 
			
Act does not receive the vote necessary for immediate effect, this 



 
			
Act takes effect September 1, 2023.


