


 



 


 

		By: Toth
H.B. No. 1752




 


 



 		
			

A BILL TO BE ENTITLED




 
			

AN ACT




 
			
relating to liability for the provision to certain children of 



 
			
procedures and treatments for gender transitioning, gender 



 
			
reassignment, or gender dysphoria; providing a civil penalty.



 
			
       BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF TEXAS:



 
			
       SECTION 1.  Title 4, Civil Practice and Remedies Code, is 



 
			
amended by adding Chapter 74B to be read as follows:



 
			
CHAPTER 74B. LIABILITY FOR CAUSING THE STERILIZATION, CASTRATION, 



 
			
OR GENITAL MUTILATION OF A MINOR.



 
			
       Sec. 74B.001.  LIABILITY PROVISIONS.  (a)  Any person who:



 
			
             (1)  knowingly prescribes puberty blockers or hormone 



 
			
therapy to a minor for the purpose of transitioning a child's 



 
			
biological sex as determined by the sex organs, chromosomes, and 



 
			
endogenous profiles of the child or affirming the child's 



 
			
perception of the child's sex if that perception is inconsistent 



 
			
with the child's biological sex;



 
			
             (2)  knowingly performs a sex-change operation on a 



 
			
minor; or



 
			
             (3)  knowingly aids or abets the conduct described in 



 
			
subsections (1)-(3), shall be strictly, absolutely, and jointly and 



 
			
severally liable in tort for any personal injuries resulting from 



 
			
the conduct described in this subsection.



 
			
       (b)  Notwithstanding any other law, a person injured by the 



 
			
conduct described in subsection (a) may bring a civil action 



 
			
against those who knowingly engaged in the conduct or knowingly 



 
			
aided or abetted the conduct that caused his injuries, and shall be 



 
			
entitled to recover:



 
			
             (1)  nominal damages;



 
			
             (2)  compensatory damages;



 
			
             (3)  punitive damages in an amount of not less than 



 
			
$10,000,000 from each defendant if irreversible sterilization or 



 
			
sexual dysfunction results, in addition to any compensatory damages 



 
			
that may be awarded; and



 
			
             (4)  costs and reasonable attorney's fees.



 
			
       (c)  Notwithstanding any other law, a person may bring an 



 
			
action under this section not later than the 20th anniversary of the 



 
			
date the cause of action accrues.



 
			
       (d)  Notwithstanding any other law, the following are not a 



 
			
defense to an action brought under this section:



 
			
             (1)  ignorance or mistake of law;



 
			
             (2)  a defendant's belief that the requirements or 



 
			
provisions of this chapter are unconstitutional or were 



 
			
unconstitutional;



 
			
             (3)  a defendant's reliance on any court decision that 



 
			
has been vacated, reversed, or overruled on appeal or by a 



 
			
subsequent court, even if that court decision had not been vacated, 



 
			
reversed, or overruled when the conduct described in subsection (a) 



 
			
occurred;



 
			
             (4)  a defendant's reliance on any state or federal 



 
			
court decision that is not binding on the court in which the action 



 
			
has been brought;



 
			
             (5)  a defendant's reliance on any federal statute, 



 
			
agency rule or action, or treaty that has been repealed, 



 
			
superseded, or declared invalid or unconstitutional, even if that 



 
			
federal statute, agency rule or action, or treaty had not been 



 
			
repealed, superseded, or declared invalid or unconstitutional when 



 
			
the conduct described in subsection (a) occurred;



 
			
             (6)  non-mutual issue preclusion or non-mutual claim 



 
			
preclusion;



 
			
             (7)  the consent of the plaintiff to the defendant's 



 
			
conduct;



 
			
             (8)  contributory or comparative negligence;



 
			
             (9)  assumption of risk;



 
			
             (10)  sovereign immunity, governmental immunity, 



 
			
official immunity, or qualified immunity;



 
			
             (11)  the plaintiff's waiver or purported waiver of 



 
			
their right to sue under this section;



 
			
             (12)  the plaintiff's failure to exhaust administrative 



 
			
remedies; or



 
			
             (13)  any claim that the enforcement of this chapter or 



 
			
the imposition of civil liability against the defendant will 



 
			
violate the constitutional rights of third parties, except as 



 
			
provided by Subsection (h).



 
			
       (e)  Notwithstanding any other law, including Chapter 17, 



 
			
Civil Practice and Remedies Code, the courts of this state shall 



 
			
have personal jurisdiction over any defendant sued under this 



 
			
section to the maximum extent permitted by the Fourteenth Amendment 



 
			
to the United States Constitution.



 
			
       (f)  Notwithstanding any other law, the law of Texas shall 



 
			
apply to any gender-transitioning treatment provided to a resident 



 
			
or citizen of Texas, regardless of where that treatment occurred, 



 
			
and to any civil action brought under this Section, to the maximum 



 
			
extent permitted by the Constitution of the United States and the 



 
			
Constitution of Texas. Any contractual choice-of-law provision 



 
			
that purports to require the law of a different jurisdiction to 



 
			
apply shall be void as against public policy, and may not be 



 
			
enforced in any state or federal court. This section shall apply 



 
			
extraterritorially to the maximum extent permitted by the 



 
			
Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of Texas.



 
			
       (g)  A civil action under this section may not be brought 



 
			
against any person that acted at the behest of federal agencies, 



 
			
contractors, or employees that are carrying out duties under 



 
			
federal law, if the imposition of liability upon that person would 



 
			
violate the doctrines of preemption or intergovernmental immunity.



 
			
       (h)  A defendant against whom an action is brought under this 



 
			
section may assert an affirmative defense to liability under this 



 
			
subsection if:



 
			
             (1)  the imposition of liability on the defendant will 



 
			
violate constitutional or federally protected rights that belong to 



 
			
the defendant personally; or



 
			
             (2)  the defendant



 
			
                   (A)  has standing to assert the rights of a third 



 
			
party under the tests for third-party standing established by the 



 
			
Supreme Court of the United States; and



 
			
                   (B)  demonstrates that the imposition of 



 
			
liability on the defendant will violate constitutional or federally 



 
			
protected rights belonging to that third party.



 
			
       (i)  Nothing in this section or chapter shall limit or 



 
			
preclude a defendant from asserting the unconstitutionality of any 



 
			
provision or application of Texas law as a defense to liability 



 
			
under this section, or from asserting any other defense that might 



 
			
be available under any other source of law.



 
			
       (j)  Notwithstanding any other law, the requirements of this 



 
			
section shall be enforced exclusively through the private civil 



 
			
actions described in Subsections (a) and (b). No direct or indirect 



 
			
enforcement of this section may be taken or threatened by the state, 



 
			
a political subdivision, a district or county attorney, or any 



 
			
officer or employee of this state or a political subdivision 



 
			
against any person or entity, by any means whatsoever, and no 



 
			
violation of this section may be used to justify or trigger the 



 
			
enforcement of any other law or any type of adverse consequence 



 
			
under any other law, except through the private civil actions 



 
			
described in Subsections (a) and (b). This section does not 



 
			
preclude or limit the enforcement of any other law or regulation 



 
			
against conduct that is independently prohibited by such other law 



 
			
or regulation, and that would remain prohibited by such other law or 



 
			
regulation in the absence of this section.



 
			
       Sec. 74B.002  VENUE.  (a)  Notwithstanding any other law, 



 
			
including Chapter 15, Civil Practice and Remedies Code, a civil 



 
			
action brought under Section 1 may be brought in:



 
			
             (1)  the county in which all or a substantial part of 



 
			
the events or omissions giving rise to the claim occurred;



 
			
             (2)  the county of residence for any one of the natural 



 
			
person defendants at the time the cause of action accrued;



 
			
             (3)  the county of the principal office in this state of 



 
			
any one of the defendants that is not a natural person; or



 
			
             (4)  the county of residence for the claimant if the 



 
			
claimant is a natural person residing in this state.



 
			
       (b)  If a civil action is brought under Section 1 in any one 



 
			
of the venues described by Subsection (a), then the action may not 



 
			
be transferred to a different venue without the written consent of 



 
			
all parties.



 
			
       (c)  Any contractual choice-of-forum provision that purports 



 
			
to require a civil action under Section 1 to be litigated in another 



 
			
forum shall be void as against public policy, and may not be 



 
			
enforced in any state or federal court.



 
			
       Sec. 74B.003.  IMMUNITY FROM SUIT AND LIMITS ON STATE-COURT 



 
			
JURISDICTION.  (a)  Notwithstanding any other law, the state and 



 
			
each of its officers and employees shall have sovereign immunity, 



 
			
its political subdivisions and each of their officers and employees 



 
			
shall have governmental immunity, and each officer and employee of 



 
			
this state or a political subdivision shall have official immunity 



 
			
(as well as sovereign or governmental immunity, as appropriate) in 



 
			
any action, claim, counterclaim, or any type of legal or equitable 



 
			
action that challenges the validity of any provision or application 



 
			
of this chapter, on constitutional grounds or otherwise, or that 



 
			
seeks to prevent or enjoin the state, its political subdivisions, 



 
			
or any officer, employee, or agent of this state or a political 



 
			
subdivision from enforcing any provision or application of this 



 
			
chapter, or from hearing, adjudicating, or docketing a civil action 



 
			
brought under Section 1, unless that immunity has been abrogated or 



 
			
preempted by federal law in a manner consistent with the 



 
			
Constitution of the United States. The sovereign immunity conferred 



 
			
by this section upon the state and each of its officers and 



 
			
employees includes the constitutional sovereign immunity 



 
			
recognized by the Supreme Court of the United States in Seminole 



 
			
Tribe of Florida v. Florida, 517 U.S. 44 (1996), and Alden v. Maine, , 517 U.S. 44 (1996), and Alden v. Maine, 



 
			
527 U.S. 706 (1999), which applies in both state and federal court 



 
			
and which may not be abrogated by Congress or by any state or 



 
			
federal court except pursuant to legislation authorized by section 



 
			
5 of the Fourteenth Amendment, by the Bankruptcy Clause of Article 



 
			
I, or by Congress's powers to raise and support Armies and to 



 
			
provide and maintain a Navy.



 
			
       (b)  Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the 



 
			
contrary, the immunities conferred by Subsection (a) shall apply in 



 
			
every court, both state and federal, and in every adjudicative 



 
			
proceeding of any type whatsoever.



 
			
       (c)  Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the 



 
			
contrary, no provision of state law may be construed to waive or 



 
			
abrogate an immunity described in Subsection (a) unless it 



 
			
expressly waives or abrogates immunity with specific reference to 



 
			
this section.



 
			
       (d)  Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the 



 
			
contrary, no attorney representing the state, its political 



 
			
subdivisions, or any officer, employee, or agent of this state or a 



 
			
political subdivision is authorized or permitted to waive an 



 
			
immunity described in Subsection (a) or take any action that would 



 
			
result in a waiver of that immunity, and any such action or 



 
			
purported waiver shall be regarded as a legal nullity and an ultra 



 
			
vires act.



 
			
       (e)  Notwithstanding any other law, including Chapter 37, 



 
			
Civil Practice and Remedies Code, and sections 22.002, 22.221, and 



 
			
24.007 through 24.011, Government Code, no court of this state may 



 
			
award declaratory or injunctive relief, or any type of writ, that 



 
			
would pronounce any provision or application of this subchapter 



 
			
invalid or unconstitutional, or that would restrain the state, its 



 
			
political subdivisions, any officer, employee, or agent of this 



 
			
state or a political subdivision, or any person from enforcing any 



 
			
provision or application of this chapter, or from hearing, 



 
			
adjudicating, docketing, or filing a civil action brought under 



 
			
Section 1, and no court of this state shall have jurisdiction to 



 
			
consider any action, claim, or counterclaim that seeks such relief.



 
			
       (f)  Nothing in this section or chapter shall be construed to 



 
			
prevent a litigant from asserting the invalidity or 



 
			
unconstitutionality of any provision or application of this chapter 



 
			
as a defense to any action, claim, or counterclaim brought against 



 
			
that litigant.



 
			
       (g)  Notwithstanding any other law, any judicial relief 



 
			
issued by a court of this state that disregards the immunities 



 
			
conferred by Subsection (a), or the limitations on jurisdiction and 



 
			
relief imposed by Subsection (e), shall be regarded as a legal 



 
			
nullity because it was issued by a court without jurisdiction, and 



 
			
may not be enforced or obeyed by any officer, employee, or agent of 



 
			
this state or a political subdivision, judicial or otherwise.



 
			
       (h)  Notwithstanding any other law, any writ, injunction, or 



 
			
declaratory judgment issued by a court of this state that purports 



 
			
to restrain the state, its political subdivisions, any officer, 



 
			
employee, or agent of this state or a political subdivision, or any 



 
			
person from hearing, adjudicating, docketing, or filing a civil 



 
			
action brought under Section 1 shall be regarded as a legal nullity 



 
			
and a violation of the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth 



 
			
Amendment, and may not be enforced or obeyed by any officer, 



 
			
employee, or agent of this state or a political subdivision, 



 
			
judicial or otherwise.



 
			
       (i)  Notwithstanding any other law, any officer, employee, 



 
			
or agent of this state or a political subdivision, judicial or 



 
			
otherwise, who issues, enforces, or obeys a writ, injunction, or 



 
			
declaratory judgment described in Subsection (h) shall be subject 



 
			
to suit by any person who is prevented from or delayed in bringing a 



 
			
civil action under Section 1, and a claimant who prevails in an 



 
			
action brought under this section shall recover:



 
			
             (1)  injunctive relief;



 
			
             (2)  compensatory damages;



 
			
             (3)  punitive damages of not less than $100,000; and



 
			
             (4)  costs and reasonable attorney's fees.



 
			
       (j)  Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the 



 
			
contrary, any person who violates Subsections (e) or (h):



 
			
             (1)  may not assert and shall not be entitled to any 



 
			
type of immunity defense, including sovereign immunity, 



 
			
governmental immunity, official immunity, or judicial immunity;



 
			
             (2)  may not and shall not be indemnified for any award 



 
			
of damages or costs and attorneys' fees entered against them, or for 



 
			
the costs of their legal defense; and



 
			
             (3)  may not and shall not receive or obtain legal 



 
			
representation from the attorney general of this state in any 



 
			
action brought under Subsection (i).



 
			
       (k)  Notwithstanding any other law, any person who sues and 



 
			
seeks any writ, injunction, or declaratory judgment that would 



 
			
restrain any person from hearing, adjudicating, docketing, or 



 
			
filing a civil action brought under Section 1 shall pay the costs 



 
			
and attorneys' fees of the person sued. A person may bring a civil 



 
			
action to recover these costs and attorneys' fees in state or 



 
			
federal court. It shall not be defense to a civil action brought 



 
			
under this Subsection that:



 
			
             (1)  the plaintiff failed to seek recovery of costs or 



 
			
attorney's fees in the underlying action;



 
			
             (2)  the court in the underlying action declined to 



 
			
recognize or enforce the requirements of this Section; or



 
			
             (3)  the court in the underlying action held that any 



 
			
provisions of this Section are invalid, unconstitutional, or 



 
			
preempted by federal law, notwithstanding the doctrines of issue or 



 
			
claim preclusion.



 
			
       SECTION 2.  This Act takes effect immediately if it receives 



 
			
a vote of two-thirds of all the members elected to each house, as 



 
			
provided by Section 39, Article III, Texas Constitution. If this 



 
			
Act does not receive the vote necessary for immediate effect, this 



 
			
Act takes effect September 1, 2023.


