


 
88R1170 SRA-D


 


 

		By: Oliverson
H.B. No. 319




 


 



 		
			

A BILL TO BE ENTITLED




 
			

AN ACT




 
			
relating to protection of persons from participation in a health 



 
			
care service for reasons of conscience; providing a civil remedy; 



 
			
authorizing disciplinary action.



 
			
       BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF TEXAS:



 
			
       SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that:



 
			
             (1)  the public policy of this state is to respect the 



 
			
conscience of all health care providers and the right of each health 



 
			
care provider to hold their own belief about whether certain health 



 
			
care services are morally acceptable;



 
			
             (2)  without comprehensive protections, the conscience 



 
			
of health care providers may be violated; and



 
			
             (3)  each health care provider must be protected from 



 
			
required participation in a health care service in which the 



 
			
provider has declined participation for reasons of conscience and 



 
			
from discriminatory adverse action resulting from the 



 
			
nonparticipation.



 
			
       SECTION 2.  Chapter 161, Health and Safety Code, is amended 



 
			
by adding Subchapter X to read as follows:



 
			
SUBCHAPTER X.  TEXAS HEALTH CARE CONSCIENCE PROTECTION ACT



 
			
       Sec. 161.701.  DEFINITIONS.  In this subchapter:



 
			
             (1)  "Conscience" means a sincerely held set of moral 



 
			
convictions arising from:



 
			
                   (A)  a belief in and relation to God;



 
			
                   (B)  a religious faith or spiritual practice; or



 
			
                   (C)  a moral philosophy or ethical position, 



 
			
without regard to whether the philosophy or position is related to a 



 
			
religious faith.



 
			
             (2)  "Emergency care" means bona fide emergency 



 
			
services provided after a sudden onset of a medical or traumatic 



 
			
condition manifested by acute symptoms of sufficient severity, 



 
			
including severe pain, such that the absence of immediate medical 



 
			
attention could reasonably be expected to:



 
			
                   (A)  place the patient's health in serious 



 
			
jeopardy;



 
			
                   (B)  result in serious impairment to the patient's 



 
			
bodily functions; or



 
			
                   (C)  result in serious dysfunction of any bodily 



 
			
organ or body part of the patient.



 
			
             (3)  "Health care facility" means a public or private 



 
			
organization, corporation, partnership, sole proprietorship, 



 
			
association, agency, network, joint venture, or other entity that 



 
			
provides health care services to patients. The term includes a 



 
			
hospital, clinic, medical center, ambulatory surgical center, 



 
			
private physician's office, pharmacy, nursing home, laboratory or 



 
			
diagnostic facility, infirmary, dispensary, medical school, 



 
			
nursing school, pharmacy school, or medical training facility.



 
			
             (4)  "Health care provider" means a nurse, nurse aide, 



 
			
medical assistant, hospital employee, allied health professional, 



 
			
laboratory technician, clinic employee, nursing home employee, 



 
			
pharmacist, pharmacy employee, researcher, medical, pharmacy, or 



 
			
nursing school student, professional, paraprofessional, or, 



 
			
without regard to whether the person holds a license, any other 



 
			
person who furnishes or assists in the furnishing of a health care 



 
			
service.



 
			
             (5)  "Health care service" means any phase of patient 



 
			
health care or treatment.  The term includes:



 
			
                   (A)  examination, testing, diagnosis, referral, 



 
			
prognosis, dispensing or administering a drug or device, ancillary 



 
			
research, instruction, therapy, treatment, and preparing for or 



 
			
performing a surgery or procedure;



 
			
                   (B)  family planning, counseling, and referrals, 



 
			
and any other advice in connection with the use or procurement of 



 
			
contraceptives, sterilization, or abortion; and



 
			
                   (C)  record-making procedures, preparation of 



 
			
treatment notes, and any other care or treatment rendered by a 



 
			
health care facility, physician, or health care provider.



 
			
             (6)  "Physician" means an individual licensed to 



 
			
practice medicine in this state.



 
			
       Sec. 161.702.  RIGHT TO DECLINE PARTICIPATION IN HEALTH CARE 



 
			
SERVICE FOR REASONS OF CONSCIENCE; CONSTRUCTION OF SUBCHAPTER.  (a)  



 
			
Except as provided by Subsection (b), a person may decline to 



 
			
participate in a health care service for reasons of conscience.



 
			
       (b)  A person may not decline to participate in the following 



 
			
services: 



 
			
             (1)  emergency care; or



 
			
             (2)  except as provided by Chapter 166, life-sustaining 



 
			
treatment.



 
			
       (c)  Nothing in this subchapter may be construed to:



 
			
             (1)  supersede Chapter 166 governing the provision, 



 
			
withholding, or withdrawing of life-sustaining treatment; or



 
			
             (2)  apply to emergency care, life-sustaining 



 
			
treatment, or cardiopulmonary resuscitation.



 
			
       (d)  An exercise of the right of conscience under this 



 
			
section is limited to a person's right to refuse to participate in a 



 
			
specific health care service.



 
			
       Sec. 161.703.  IMMUNITY OF PHYSICIANS AND HEALTH CARE 



 
			
PROVIDERS.  A physician or health care provider may not be held 



 
			
civilly or criminally liable because the physician or health care 



 
			
provider declines to participate in a health care service wholly or 



 
			
partly for reasons of conscience.



 
			
       Sec. 161.704.  ADVERSE ACTION.  A person, including a public 



 
			
official and a medical school or other institution that conducts 



 
			
education or training programs for physicians or health care 



 
			
providers, violates this subchapter by taking an adverse action 



 
			
against another person because the other person declines to 



 
			
participate in a health care service for reasons of conscience. 



 
			
Violations include discrimination against or taking an adverse 



 
			
action with regard to: 



 
			
             (1)  licensure;



 
			
             (2)  certification; 



 
			
             (3)  employment terms, benefits, seniority status, 



 
			
promotion, or transfer;



 
			
             (4)  staff appointments or other privileges;



 
			
             (5)  denial of employment, admission, or participation 



 
			
in a program for which the other person is eligible;



 
			
             (6)  reference to reasons of conscience in an 



 
			
application form;



 
			
             (7)  questions regarding an applicant's participation 



 
			
in providing a health care service for reasons of conscience;



 
			
             (8)  imposition of a burden in the terms or conditions 



 
			
of employment;



 
			
             (9)  denial of aid, assistance, or benefits;



 
			
             (10)  conditional receipt of the aid, assistance, or 



 
			
benefits; or



 
			
             (11)  coercion or disqualification of the other person 



 
			
receiving aid, assistance, or benefits.



 
			
       Sec. 161.705.  PROTOCOL FOR DECLINING PARTICIPATION IN 



 
			
PROVISION OF HEALTH CARE SERVICE.  (a)  A health care facility shall 



 
			
develop a written protocol for circumstances in which a person 



 
			
declines to participate in providing a health care service, other 



 
			
than emergency care or life-sustaining treatment, for reasons of 



 
			
conscience. The protocol must:



 
			
             (1)  describe a patient's access to health care 



 
			
services and information to ensure the patient is not permanently 



 
			
or substantially prevented from obtaining the services; and



 
			
             (2)  explain the process the facility will implement to 



 
			
facilitate in a timely manner the patient's access to the services.



 
			
       (b)  A person who declines to participate in providing a 



 
			
health care service for reasons of conscience shall: 



 
			
             (1)  notify the health care facility of the 



 
			
declination; and



 
			
             (2)  comply with the applicable protocol developed 



 
			
under this section.



 
			
       (c)  This section does not permit a protocol developed under 



 
			
this section to require a health care facility, physician, or 



 
			
health care provider to counsel a patient or refer the patient to 



 
			
another physician or facility regarding a health care service that 



 
			
is contrary to the conscience of the physician or health care 



 
			
provider.



 
			
       Sec. 161.706.  DISCIPLINARY ACTION; COMPLAINT.  (a)  A 



 
			
health care facility, physician, or health care provider that holds 



 
			
a license issued by a licensing agency in this state is subject to 



 
			
review and disciplinary action by the licensing agency for a 



 
			
violation of this subchapter as if the facility, physician, or 



 
			
provider violated the applicable licensing law.



 
			
       (b)  A person who is injured by a violation of this 



 
			
subchapter may file a complaint with the licensing agency that 



 
			
issued a license to the health care facility, physician, or health 



 
			
care provider that allegedly violated this subchapter.



 
			
       (c)  A physician or health care provider may not file a 



 
			
complaint with the appropriate licensing agency under this section  



 
			
unless the physician or health care provider complies with the 



 
			
health care facility's protocol developed under Section 161.705.



 
			
       Sec. 161.707.  CIVIL REMEDIES.  A person who is injured by a 



 
			
violation of this subchapter may bring a civil action against a 



 
			
person who violates this subchapter. A person who brings an action 



 
			
under this section may obtain:



 
			
             (1)  injunctive relief;



 
			
             (2)  damages incurred by the person, including:



 
			
                   (A)  actual damages for all psychological, 



 
			
emotional, and physical injuries resulting from the violation of 



 
			
this subchapter;



 
			
                   (B)  court costs; and



 
			
                   (C)  reasonable attorney's fees; or



 
			
             (3)  both injunctive relief and damages.



 
			
       SECTION 3.  Not later than December 1, 2023, a health care 



 
			
facility, as that term is defined by Section 161.701, Health and 



 
			
Safety Code, as added by this Act, shall adopt protocols required by 



 
			
Section 161.705, Health and Safety Code, as added by this Act.



 
			
       SECTION 4.  Section 161.703, Health and Safety Code, as 



 
			
added by this Act, applies only to a cause of action that accrues on 



 
			
or after the effective date of this Act.



 
			
       SECTION 5.  This Act takes effect September 1, 2023.


