

SENATE, No. 2648 

STATE OF NEW JERSEY
220th LEGISLATURE
  
INTRODUCED MAY 16, 2022
 




 
Sponsored by:
Senator  EDWARD DURR
District 3 (Cumberland, Gloucester and Salem)
 
 
 
 
SYNOPSIS
     Prohibits school districts from incorporating
instruction on sexual orientation or gender identity for students in grades
kindergarten through six; requires consent from parents or guardians for
students in grades seven through 12 for instruction on sexual orientation or
gender identity. 
 
CURRENT VERSION OF TEXT 
     As introduced.
   




An Act concerning public school curriculum and
supplementing chapter 35 of Title 18A of the New Jersey Statutes.
 
     Be It
Enacted by the Senate and General Assembly of
the State of New Jersey:
 
     1.    a.  A school district
shall not include, as part of a course of instruction, information on sexual
orientation or gender identity for students in grades kindergarten through six
as part of the school district's implementation of the New Jersey Student
Learning Standards.
     b.    A school district shall
not provide instruction for students in grades seven through 12 that includes
information on sexual orientation or gender identity without receiving prior
written consent from the student's parent or guardian.  Any student whose
parent or guardian does not provide prior written consent shall be excused from
that portion of the course where such instruction is provided and no penalties
as to credit or graduation shall result therefrom.
 
     2.    a.  A parent or guardian
whose child participated in a course of instruction that includes information
on sexual orientation or gender identity in violation of section 1 of this act may
bring a civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction for injunctive
relief.
     b.    If a school district or
employee of a school district knowingly violates the provisions of section 1 of
this act, the Office of the Attorney General may seek an injunction against the
school district or the employee of the school district.
 
     3.    The Commissioner of
Education may withhold State funds from a school district that knowingly
violates the provisions of section 1 of this act until the commissioner finds
that the school district is no longer in violation of this section.
 
     4.    This act shall take
effect immediately and shall first apply to the first full school year
following the date of enactment.
 
 
STATEMENT
 
     This bill prohibits school
districts from incorporating instruction on sexual orientation or gender
identity for students in grades kindergarten through six.  Under the bill, any
student in grades seven through 12 whose parent or guardian does not provide
prior written consent to participate in a course that includes information on
sexual orientation or gender identity will be excused from that portion of the course
without penalty.  
     Also under the bill, a parent
or guardian whose child participated in a course that includes information on
sexual orientation or gender identity in grades kindergarten through six, or
grades seven through 12 without prior written consent, may bring a civil action
in any court of competent jurisdiction for injunctive relief.  If a school
district or employee of a school district knowingly violates the provisions of
this section, the Office of the Attorney General may seek an injunction against
the school district or the employee of the school district.  The Commissioner
of Education may withhold State funds from a school district that knowingly
violates the provisions of this bill.

