

 
 
PREFILED JAN 06 2023



REFERENCE TITLE: state monies; drag
  shows; minors




 
 
 
 
State of
  Arizona
Senate
Fifty-sixth
  Legislature
First Regular
  Session
2023
 
 
 




SB 1026




 




Introduced by 
Senator Kavanagh
 



 
 
 
 
 
 
 
An Act
 
amending
title 35, chapter 1, article 5, Arizona Revised Statutes, by adding section
35-196.06; amending section 35-197, Arizona Revised Statutes; relating to
the prohibited use of state monies.
 
 
(TEXT OF BILL BEGINS ON NEXT PAGE)
 




Be it enacted by the Legislature of the State of Arizona:
Section 1. Title 35, chapter 1, article 5,
Arizona Revised Statutes, is amended by adding section 35-196.06, to read:
START_STATUTE35-196.06. Use of state monies prohibited; drag shows targeting minors;
definition
A. Notwithstanding any other law, tax
monies of this state, federal monies passing through the state treasury or any
other state monies may not be used by any person or entity, including any state-funded
institution or facility, for a drag show targeting minors.
B. Notwithstanding any other law, tax
monies of this state, federal monies passing through the state treasury or any
other state monies may not be distributed to any person or entity, including
any state-funded institution or facility, that operates a drag show
targeting minors.
C. For the purposes of this section,
"Drag show targeting minors" means a show or performance for entertainment
at which a single performer or group of performers dress in clothing and makeup
opposite of the performer's or group of performers' gender at birth to
exaggerate gender signifiers and roles and engage in singing, dancing or a
monologue or skit in order to entertain a target audience of persons under
eighteen years of age. END_STATUTE
Sec. 2. Section 35-197, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:
START_STATUTE35-197. Violations; classification; prohibition on state monies
A. Any officer, agent or
employee of the state who knowingly fails or refuses to comply with any of the
provisions of this chapter is guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor.
B. A person or entity that is
convicted of violating section 35-196.06 may not receive or spend any
state monies for thirty-six months after the conviction. END_STATUTE

