


 



 


 

		By: Swanson
H.B. No. 23




 


 



 		
			

A BILL TO BE ENTITLED




 
			

AN ACT




 
			
relating to participation in athletic activities based on 



 
			
biological sex; providing a civil right to action for K-12 athletes 



 
			
and college athletes.



 
			
       BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF TEXAS:



 
			
       SECTION 1.  SHORT TITLE.  This Act may be cited as the Save 



 
			
Women's Sports Act.



 
			
       SECTION 2.  Section 33.0834, Texas Education Code, is 



 
			
amended to read as follows:



 
			
       Sec. 33.0834.  INTERSCHOLASTIC ATHLETIC COMPETITION



 
			
PARTICIPATION BASED ON BIOLOGICAL SEX.  (a)  Except as provided by 



 
			
Subsection (b), an interscholastic athletic team or sport sponsored 



 
			
or authorized by a school district,or open-enrollment charter 



 
			
school, or any private school that competes against a public school



 
			
may not allow a student to competeparticipate in an 



 
			
interscholastic athletic competitionteam or sport sponsored or 



 
			
authorized by the district or school that is designated for the 



 
			
biological sex opposite to the student's biological sex as 



 
			
correctly stated on:



 
			
             (1)  the student's official birth certificate, as 



 
			
described by Subsection (c); or



 
			
             (2)  if the student's official birth certificate 



 
			
described by Subdivision (1) is unobtainable, another government 



 
			
record that accurately states the student's biological sex.



 
			
       (b)  An interscholastic athletic team or sport described by 



 
			
Subsection (a) may allow a female student to competeparticipate in 



 
			
an interscholastic athletic competitionteam or sport that is 



 
			
designated for male students if a corresponding interscholastic



 
			
athletic competitionteam or sport designated for female students 



 
			
is not offered or available.



 
			
       (c)  For purposes of this section, a statement of a student's 



 
			
biological sex on the student's official birth certificate is 



 
			
considered to have correctly stated the student's biological sex 



 
			
only if the statement was:



 
			
             (1)  entered at or near the time of the student's birth; 



 
			
or



 
			
             (2)  modified to correct any type of scrivener or 



 
			
clerical error in the student's biological sex.



 
			
       (d)  The University Interscholastic League shall adopt rules 



 
			
to implement this section, provided that the rules must be approved 



 
			
by the commissioner in accordance with Section 33.083(b).  The 



 
			
rules must ensure compliance with state and federal law regarding 



 
			
the confidentiality of student medical information, including 



 
			
Chapter 181, Health and Safety Code, and the Health Insurance 



 
			
Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (42 U.S.C. Section 1320d 



 
			
et seq.).



 
			
       (e)  A student shall have a private cause of action for 



 
			
injunctive relief, damages, attorneys' fees and cost, and any other 



 
			
relief available under law if the student is:



 
			
             (1)  deprived of an athletic opportunity or suffers any 



 
			
direct or indirect harm as a result of a school district, charter 



 
			
school, or private school knowingly violating this Act; or



 
			
             (2)  subject to retaliation or other adverse action by 



 
			
a school district, charter school, private school, the University 



 
			
Interscholastic League, or any athletic association or 



 
			
organization as a result of reporting a violation of this Act.



 
			
       SECTION 3.  Subchapter Z, Chapter 51, Education Code, is 



 
			
amended by adding Section 51.982 to read as follows:



 
			
       Sec. 51.982.  ATHLETIC PARTICIPATION BASED ON BIOLOGICAL 



 
			
SEX.  (a)  Except as provided by Subsection (b), an athletic team or 



 
			
sport sponsored or authorized by a public institution of higher 



 
			
education, public junior college, or any private institution or 



 
			
private junior college that competes against a public institution 



 
			
or public junior college may not allow a student to participate in 



 
			
an athletic team or sport sponsored or authorized by the 



 
			
institution of higher education or junior college that is 



 
			
designated for the biological sex opposite to the student's 



 
			
biological sex as correctly stated on:



 
			
             (1)  the student's official birth certificate, as 



 
			
described by Subsection (c); or



 
			
             (2)  if the student's official birth certificate 



 
			
described by Subdivision (1) is unobtainable, another government 



 
			
record that accurately states the student's biological sex.



 
			
       (b)  An athletic team or sport described by Subsection (a) 



 
			
may allow a female student to participate in an athletic team or 



 
			
sport that is designated for male students if a corresponding 



 
			
athletic team or sport designated for female students is not 



 
			
offered or available.



 
			
       (c)  For purposes of this section, a statement of a student's 



 
			
biological sex on the student's official birth certificate is 



 
			
considered to have correctly stated the student's biological sex 



 
			
only if the statement was:



 
			
             (1)  entered at or near the time of the student's birth; 



 
			
or



 
			
             (2)  modified to correct any type of scrivener or 



 
			
clerical error in the student's biological sex.



 
			
       (d)  A student shall have a private cause of action for 



 
			
injunctive relief, damages, attorneys' fees and cost, and any other 



 
			
relief available under law if the student is:



 
			
             (1)  deprived of an athletic opportunity or suffers any 



 
			
direct or indirect harm as a result of an institution of higher 



 
			
education or junior college knowingly violating this Act; or



 
			
             (2)  subject to retaliation or other adverse action by 



 
			
an institution of higher education, junior college, or any athletic 



 
			
association or organization as a result of reporting a violation of 



 
			
this Act.



 
			
       SECTION 4.  This Act takes effect immediately if it receives 



 
			
a vote of two-thirds of all the members elected to each house, as 



 
			
provided by Section 39, Article III, Texas Constitution.  If this 



 
			
Act does not receive the vote necessary for immediate effect, this 



 
			
Act takes effect September 1, 2023.


