 By: Swanson H.B. No. 23 A BILL TO BE ENTITLED AN ACT relating to participation in athletic activities based on biological sex; providing a civil right to action for K-12 athletes and college BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF TEXAS: SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE. This Act may be cited as the Save Women's Sports Act. SECTION 2. Section 33.0834, Texas Education Code, is amended to read as follows: Sec. 33.0834. INTERSCHOLASTIC ATHLETIC COMPETITION PARTICIPATION BASED ON BIOLOGICAL SEX. (a) Except as provided by Subsection (b), an interscholastic athletic team or sport sponsored or authorized by a school district,or open-enrollment charter school, or any private school that competes against a public school may not allow a student to compete participate in an interscholastic athletic competition team or sport sponsored or authorized by the district or school that is designated for the biological sex opposite to the student's biological sex as correctly stated on: (1) the student's official birth certificate, as described by Subsection (c); or (2) if the student's official birth certificate described by Subdivision (1) is unobtainable, another government record that accurately states the student's biological sex. (b) An interscholastic athletic team or sport described by Subsection (a) may allow a female student to compete participate in an interscholastic athletic competition team or sport that is designated for male students if a corresponding interscholastic athletic competition team or sport designated for female students is not offered or available. (c) For purposes of this section, a statement of a student's biological sex on the student's official birth certificate is considered to have correctly stated the student's biological sex only if the statement was: (1) entered at or near the time of the student's birth; or (2) modified to correct any type of scrivener or clerical error in the student's biological sex. (d) The University Interscholastic League shall adopt rules to implement this section, provided that the rules must be approved by the commissioner in accordance with Section 33.083(b). The rules must ensure compliance with state and federal law regarding the confidentiality of student medical information, including Chapter 181, Health and Safety Code, and the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (42 U.S.C. Section 1320d et seq.). (e) A student shall have a private cause of action for injunctive relief, damages, attorneys' fees and cost, and any other relief available under law if the student is: (1) deprived of an athletic opportunity or suffers any direct or indirect harm as a result of a school district, charter school, or private school knowingly violating this Act; or (2) subject to retaliation or other adverse action by a school district, charter school, private school, the University Interscholastic League, or any athletic association or organization as a result of reporting a violation of this Act. SECTION 3. Subchapter Z, Chapter 51, Education Code, is amended by adding Section 51.982 to read as follows: Sec. 51.982. ATHLETIC PARTICIPATION BASED ON BIOLOGICAL SEX. (a) Except as provided by Subsection (b), an athletic team or sport sponsored or authorized by a public institution of higher education, public junior college, or any private institution or private junior college that competes against a public institution or public junior college may not allow a student to participate in an athletic team or sport sponsored or authorized by the institution of higher education or junior college that is designated for the biological sex opposite to the student's biological sex as correctly stated on: (1) the student's official birth certificate, as described by Subsection (c); or (2) if the student's official birth certificate described by Subdivision (1) is unobtainable, another government record that accurately states the student's biological sex. (b) An athletic team or sport described by Subsection (a) may allow a female student to participate in an athletic team or sport that is designated for male students if a corresponding athletic team or sport designated for female students is not offered or available. (c) For purposes of this section, a statement of a student's biological sex on the student's official birth certificate is considered to have correctly stated the student's biological sex only if the statement was: (1) entered at or near the time of the student's birth; or (2) modified to correct any type of scrivener or clerical error in the student's biological sex. (d) A student shall have a private cause of action for injunctive relief, damages, attorneys' fees and cost, and any other relief available under law if the student is: (1) deprived of an athletic opportunity or suffers any direct or indirect harm as a result of an institution of higher education or junior college knowingly violating this Act; or (2) subject to retaliation or other adverse action by an institution of higher education, junior college, or any athletic association or organization as a result of reporting a violation of this Act. SECTION 4. This Act takes effect immediately if it receives a vote of two-thirds of all the members elected to each house, as provided by Section 39, Article III, Texas Constitution. If this Act does not receive the vote necessary for immediate effect, this Act takes effect September 1, 2023. 88R425 JG-F By: Perry S.B. No. 162 A BILL TO BE ENTITLED AN ACT relating to the required inclusion of a person's sex on a birth certificate and prohibited change of sex on the birth certificate of certain minors. BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF TEXAS: SECTION 1. Section 192.002, Health and Safety Code, is amended by adding Subsection (c-1) to read as follows: (c-1) The form must include a space for recording the biological sex of a child as either male or female. SECTION 2. Section 192.003, Health and Safety Code, is amended by adding Subsections (f) and (g) to read as follows: (f) Subject to Subsection (g), a person required to file a birth certificate under this section shall ensure the biological sex of a child, as determined by the sex organs, chromosomes, or endogenous profile of the child, is listed in the appropriate space on the child's birth certificate. A person required to report a birth under this section shall report the child's biological sex to the local registrar, and the local registrar shall list the biological sex in the appropriate space on the birth certificate. (g) A person is not required to list on the birth certificate or report to the local registrar the biological sex of a child whose biological sex is not determined at birth because the child, as determined by a physician, has atypical or ambiguous sex organs, chromosomes, or endogenous profile for either male or female. The birth certificate may be amended under Section 192.011 at any time after the child's sex is determined to complete the information on the certificate by including the child's determined sex. SECTION 3. Section 192.011, Health and Safety Code, is amended by amending Subsection (b) and adding Subsection (d) to read as follows: (b) Except as provided by Subsection (d), on [On] the request of the person or the person's legal representative, the state registrar, local registrar, or other person who issues birth certificates shall issue a birth certificate that incorporates the completed or corrected information instead of issuing a copy of the original or supplementary certificate with an amending certificate attached. (d) The state registrar, local registrar, or other person who issues a birth certificate under this section may not issue, and a court may not order the issuance of, a birth certificate that incorporates the completed or corrected biological sex information for a minor unless: (1) the certificate corrects a clerical error on the original birth certificate; (2) the original birth certificate does not list the minor's biological sex as required by Section 192.003(f) and the certificate completes the information by listing the minor's biological sex; or (3) for a minor who at birth had atypical or ambiguous sex organs, chromosomes, or endogenous profile for either male or female and whose sex is later determined, the certificate: (A) corrects the biological sex information listed as either male or female on an original birth certificate by listing the minor's determined sex as the other biological sex; or (B) completes the biological sex information not previously listed on an original birth certificate by listing the determined sex. SECTION 4. As soon as practicable after the effective date of this Act, the executive commissioner of the Health and Human Services Commission shall adopt rules necessary to implement the changes in law made by this Act. SECTION 5. This Act takes effect September 1, 2023. 23100643D HOUSE BILL NO. 1387 Offered January 11, 2023 Prefiled November 15, 2022 A BILL to amend and reenact §22.1-271.7 of the Code of Virginia and to amend the Code of Virginia by adding sections numbered 22.1-271.9 and 23.1-408.2, relating to K-12 schools and institutions of higher education; designation of interscholastic, intercollegiate, intramural, and club athletic teams and sports based on biological sex; identification of student's biological sex on athletic eligibility form; student participation in female teams or sports; civil cause of action. ---------- Patron-- Greenhalgh ---------- Committee Referral Pending ---------- Be it enacted by the General Assembly of Virginia: 1. That §22.1-271.7 of the Code of Virginia is amended and reenacted and that the Code of Virginia is amended by adding sections numbered 22.1-271.9 and 23.1-408.2 as follows: §22.1-271.7. Public school student-athletes; pre-participation physical examination; athletics eligibility form. No public middle elementary or secondary school student shall be a participant on or try out for any school interscholastic, intramural, or club athletic team or squad sport with a predetermined roster, regular practices, and scheduled competitions with other middle schools sponsored by a public school unless such student has submitted to the school principal a signed report an athletics eligibility form signed from by a licensed physician, a licensed nurse practitioner practicing in accordance with the provisions of § 54.1-2957, or a licensed physician assistant acting under the supervision of a licensed physician attesting: (i) that such student has been examined, within the preceding 12 months, and (ii) that such student was found to be physically fit for athletic competition, and (iii) to such student's biological sex. §22.1-271.9. Interscholastic, intramural, and club athletic teams and sports; designation of teams; student participation. A. Each interscholastic, intramural, or club athletic team or sport sponsored by a public school shall be expressly designated as one of the following based on biological sex: 1. For "males," "men," or "boys"; 2. For "females," "women," or "girls"; or 3. For "coed" or "mixed" if participation on such team or in such sport is open to both (i) males, men, or boys and (ii) females, women, or girls. B. Each interscholastic, intramural, or club athletic team or sport sponsored by a public school that is expressly designated for "females," "women," or "girls," pursuant to subsection A shall not be open to any student whose biological sex is male. C. Nothing in this section shall be construed to restrict the eligibility of any student to participate in any interscholastic, intramural, or club athletic team or sport that is expressly designated for "males," "men," or "boys" or as "coed" or "mixed." D. The eligibility of a public school student to participate on any interscholastic, intramural, or club athletic team or sport that is expressly designated for (i) "males," "men," or "boys," or (ii) "females," "women," or "girls" shall be based on the student's biological sex as identified on such student's signed athletics eligibility form, required pursuant to §22.1-271.7. E. No interscholastic, intramural, or club athletic team or sport that is sponsored by a public school shall compete against any interscholastic, intramural, or club athletic team or sport that is sponsored by a private school unless such private school complies with the applicable provisions of this section, mutatis mutandis. F. No government entity, licensing or accrediting organization, or athletic association or organization shall entertain a complaint, open an investigation, or take any other adverse action against a school for explicitly designating or maintaining separate interscholastic, intramural, or club athletic teams or sports for "females," "women," or "girls," pursuant to subsections A, B, and E. Any school that suffers any direct or direct harm as a result of a violation of this section shall have a private cause of action for injunctive relief, damages, and any other relief available under law against such government entity, licensing or accrediting organization, or athletic association or organization. G. Any student who is (i) deprived of an athletic opportunity or suffers any direct or indirect harm as a result of a school knowingly violating this section or (ii) subject to retaliation or other adverse action by a school, athletic association, or organization as a result of reporting a violation of this section to an employee or representative of such school, athletic association, or organization, or to any state or federal agency with oversight of school in the Commonwealth, shall have a private cause of action for injunctive relief, damages, and any other relief available under law against such school, athletic association, or organization. H. All civil actions brought pursuant to subsection F or G must be initiated within two years after the harm occurred. I. The provisions of this section shall be construed liberally so as to effectuate its purposes to the fullest extent permitted by law. If any one or more provisions, subsections, sentences, clauses, phrases, or words of this section or their application to any individual, entity, or circumstance is found to be unconstitutional, it shall be deemed severable, and the remainder of this section and its applicability to other individuals, entities, or circumstances not similarly situated shall remain effective. §23.1-408.2. Intercollegiate, intramural, and club athletic teams and sports; designation of teams; student participation. A. Each intercollegiate, intramural, and club athletic team or sport that is sponsored by a public institution of higher education shall be expressly designated as one of the following based on biological sex: 1. For "males," "men," or "boys"; 2. For "females," "women," or "girls"; or 3. For "coed" or "mixed," if participation on such team or sport is open to both (i) males, men, or boys and (ii) females, women, or girls. B. Each intercollegiate, intramural, or club athletic team or sport that is sponsored by a public institution of higher education and that is expressly designated for "females," "women," or "girls" pursuant to subsection A shall not be open to any student whose biological sex is male. This section shall not be construed to restrict the eligibility of any student to try out for or compete in any intercollegiate, intramural, or club athletic team or sport sponsored by such institution of higher education that is expressly designated for "males," "men," or "boys" or as "coed" or "mixed." C. No student enrolled at a public institution of higher education shall be a participant on or try out for any intercollegiate, intramural, or club athletic team or sport sponsored by a public institution of higher education unless such student has submitted to the appropriate department or individual of the institution an athletics eligibility form signed by a licensed physician, a licensed nurse practitioner practicing in accordance with the provisions of §54.1-2957, or a licensed physician assistant acting under the supervision of a licensed physician verifying: (i) that such student has received a physical examination within the preceding 12 months, (ii) such student was found physically fit for athletic competition, and (iii) such student's biological sex. D. No intercollegiate, intramural, or club athletic team or sport that is sponsored by a public institution of higher education shall compete against any private institution of higher education unless such private institution of higher education complies with the applicable provisions of this section. E. No government entity, licensing or accrediting organization, or athletic association or organization shall entertain a complaint, open an investigation, or take any other adverse action against a school for explicitly designating or maintaining separate intercollegiate, intramural, or club athletic teams or sports for "females, "women," or "girls" pursuant to subsections A, B, and C. Any institution of higher education that suffers any direct or indirect harm as a result of a violation of this section shall have a private cause of action for injunctive relief, damages, and any other relief available under law against such government entity, licensing or accrediting organization, or athletic association or organization. F. Any student who is (i) deprived of an athletic opportunity or suffers any direct or indirect harm as a result of a knowing violation of this section by a public institution of higher education or (ii) subject to retaliation or other adverse action by an institution of higher education, athletic association, or organization as a result of reporting a violation of this section to an employee or representative of such institution, athletic association, or organization, or to any state or federal agency with oversight of such institution in the Commonwealth, shall have a private cause of action for injunctive relief, damages, and any other relief available under law against such institution, athletic association, or organization. G. All civil actions brought pursuant to subsections E or F must be initiated within two years after the harm occurred. H. The provisions of this section shall be construed liberally so as to effectuate its purposes to the fullest extent permitted by law. If any one or more provisions, subsections, sentences, clauses, phrases, or words of this section or their application to any individual, entity, or circumstance is found to be unconstitutional, it shall be deemed severable, and the remainder of this section and its applicability to other individuals, entities, or circumstances not similarly situated shall remain effective. 2. That the provisions of this act shall be effective beginning with the 2023–2024 school year.23100911D SENATE BILL NO. 791 Offered January 11, 2023 Prefiled November 29, 2022 A BILL to amend the Code of Virginia by adding in Title 32.1 a chapter numbered 21, consisting of sections numbered 32.1-376 through 32.1-379, and by adding a section numbered 38.2-3449.2, relating to establishment of the Save Adolescents from Experimentation (SAFE) Act; health benefit plans; coverage for gender transition procedures. ---------- Patron-- Chase ---------- Referred to Committee on Education and Health ---------- Be it enacted by the General Assembly of Virginia: 1. That the Code of Virginia is amended by adding in Title 32.1 a chapter numbered 21, consisting of sections numbered 32.1-376 through 32.1-379, and by adding a section numbered 38.2-3449.2 as follows: CHAPTER 21. SAVE ADOLESCENTS FROM EXPERIMENTATION (SAFE) ACT. §32.1-376. Definitions. As used in this chapter, unless the context requires a different meaning: "Biological sex" means the biological indication of male and female in the context of reproductive potential or capacity, such as sex chromosomes, naturally occurring sex hormones, gonads, and nonambiguous internal and external genitalia present at birth, without regard to an individual's psychological, chosen, or subjective experience of gender. "Cross-sex hormones" means: 1. Testosterone or other androgens given to biological females in amounts that are larger or more potent than would normally occur naturally in healthy biological sex females; and 2. Estrogen given to biological males in amounts that are larger or more potent than would normally occur naturally in healthy biological sex males. "Gender" means the psychological, behavioral, social, and cultural aspects of being male or female. "Gender reassignment surgery" means any medical or surgical service that seeks to surgically alter or remove healthy physical or anatomical characteristics or features that are typical for the individual's biological sex in order to instill or create physiological or anatomical characteristics that resemble a sex different from the individual's biological sex, including without limitation genital or nongenital gender reassignment surgery performed for the purpose of assisting an individual with a gender transition. "Gender transition" means the process in which an individual goes from identifying with and living as a gender that corresponds to the individual's biological sex to identifying with and living as a gender different from his or her biological sex, which process may involve social, legal, or physical changes. "Gender transition procedure" means any medical or surgical service, including without limitation physician's services, inpatient and outpatient hospital services, or prescribed drugs related to gender transition, that seeks to: 1. Alter or remove physical or anatomical characteristics or features that are typical for an individual's biological sex; or 2. Instill or create physiological or anatomical characteristics that resemble a sex different from an individual's biological sex, including without limitation (i) medical services that provide puberty-blocking drugs, cross-sex hormones, or other mechanisms to promote the development of feminizing or masculinizing features in the opposite biological sex or (ii) genital or nongenital gender reassignment surgery performed for the purpose of assisting an individual with a gender transition. "Gender transition procedure" does not include: 1. Services to individuals born with a medically verifiable disorder of sex development, including an individual with external biological sex characteristics that are irresolvably ambiguous, such as a person born with 46, XX with virilization, with 46, XY with undervirilization, or having both ovarian and testicular tissue; 2. Services provided when a physician has otherwise diagnosed a disorder of sexual development or the physician has determined through genetic or biochemical testing that an individual does not have normal sex chromosome structure, sex steroid hormone production, or sex steroid hormone action; 3. The treatment of any infection, injury, disease, or disorder that has been caused by or exacerbated by the performance of gender transition procedures, whether or not the gender transition procedure was performed in accordance with state and federal law or whether or not funding for the gender transition procedure is permissible under this chapter; or 4. Any procedure undertaken because the individual suffers from a physical disorder, physical injury, or physical illness that would, as certified by a physician, place the individual in imminent danger of death or impairment of major bodily function unless surgery is performed. "Genital gender reassignment surgery" means a medical procedure performed for the purpose of assisting an individual with a gender transition, including without limitation: 1. Surgical procedures such as penectomy, orchiectomy, vaginoplasty, clitoroplasty, or vulvoplasty for biologically male patients or hysterectomy or oophorectomy for biologically female patients; 2. Reconstruction of the fixed part of the urethra with or without a metoidioplasty; or 3. Phalloplasty, vaginectomy, scrotoplasty, or implantation of erection or testicular prostheses for biologically female patients. "Health care professional" means an individual who is licensed, certified, or otherwise authorized by the laws of the Commonwealth to administer health care in the ordinary course of the practice of his profession. "Nongenital gender reassignment surgery" means medical procedures performed for the purpose of assisting an individual with a gender transition, including without limitation: 1. Surgical procedures for biologically male patients such as augmentation mammoplasty, facial feminization surgery, liposuction, lipofilling, voice surgery, thyroid cartilage reduction, gluteal augmentation, hair reconstruction, or various aesthetic procedures; or 2. Surgical procedures for biologically female patients such as subcutaneous mastectomy, voice surgery, liposuction, lipofilling, pectoral implants, or various aesthetic procedures. "Physician" means a person who is licensed to practice medicine in the Commonwealth. "Puberty-blocking drugs" means gonadotropin-releasing hormone analogues or other synthetic drugs used in biological males to stop luteinizing hormone secretion and therefore testosterone secretion, or synthetic drugs used in biological females which stop the production of estrogens and progesterone, when used to delay or suppress pubertal development in minors for the purpose of assisting an individual with a gender transition. "Public funds" means state, county, or local government moneys, in addition to any department, agency, or instrumentality moneys authorized or appropriated under state law or derived from any fund in which such moneys are deposited. §32.1-377. Prohibition of gender transition procedures for minors. A. A physician or other health care professional shall not provide gender transition procedures to any individual younger than 18 years of age. B. A physician or other health care professional shall not refer any individual younger than 18 years of age to any health care professional for gender transition procedures. C. A physician or other health care professional may provide any of the following procedures that are not gender transition procedures to an individual younger than 18 years of age: 1. Services to individuals born with a medically verifiable disorder of sex development, including an individual with external biological sex characteristics that are irresolvably ambiguous, such as those born with 46,XX with virilization, with 46,XY with undervirilization, or having both ovarian and testicular tissue; 2. Services provided when a physician has otherwise diagnosed a disorder of sexual development or the physician has determined through genetic or biochemical testing that the person does not have normal sex chromosome structure, sex steroid hormone production, or sex steroid hormone action; 3. The treatment of any infection, injury, disease, or disorder that has been caused by or exacerbated by the performance of gender transition procedures, whether or not the gender transition procedure was performed in accordance with state and federal law or whether or not funding for the gender transition procedure is permissible under this chapter; or 4. Any procedure undertaken because the individual suffers from a physical disorder, physical injury, or physical illness that would, as certified by a physician, place the individual in imminent danger of death or impairment of major bodily function unless surgery is performed. §32.1-378. Prohibition on use of public funds for gender transition procedures. A. Public funds shall not be directly or indirectly used, granted, paid, or distributed to any entity, organization, or individual that provides gender transition procedures to an individual younger than 18 years of age. B. Health care services furnished in the following situations shall not include gender transition procedures to an individual younger than 18 years of age: 1. By or in a health care facility owned by the state or a county or local government; or 2. By a physician or other health care professional who is an employee of the Commonwealth. C. Any amount paid by an individual or an entity during a taxable year for provision of gender transition procedures or as premiums for health care coverage that includes coverage for gender transition procedures is not tax-deductible. D. The State Plan for Medical Assistance Services shall not reimburse or provide coverage for gender transition procedures to an individual younger than 18 years of age. §32.1-379. Enforcement. A. Any referral for or provision of gender transition procedures to an individual younger than 18 years of age is unprofessional conduct and is subject to discipline by the appropriate licensing entity or disciplinary review board with competent jurisdiction in the Commonwealth. B. An individual may assert an actual or threatened violation of this chapter as a claim or defense in a judicial or administrative proceeding and obtain compensatory damages, injunctive relief, declaratory relief, or any other appropriate relief. C. An individual shall bring a claim for a violation of this chapter no later than two years after the date the cause of action accrues. D. An individual younger than 18 years of age may bring an action under this chapter throughout the individual's minority through a parent or next friend and may bring an action in his own name upon reaching majority at any time from that point until 20 years after reaching 18 years of age. E. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, an action under this chapter may be commenced, and relief may be granted, in a judicial proceeding without regard to whether the individual commencing the action has sought or exhausted available administrative remedies. F. In any action or proceeding to enforce a provision of this chapter, a prevailing party who establishes a violation of this chapter shall recover reasonable attorney fees. G. The Attorney General may bring an action to enforce compliance with this chapter. H. This chapter does not deny, impair, or otherwise affect any right or authority of the Attorney General, the Commonwealth, or any agency, officer, or employee of the state, acting under any law other than this chapter, to institute or intervene in any proceeding. §38.2-3449.2. Insurance coverage of gender transition procedures for minors prohibited. A. As used in this section, "gender transition procedure" means the same as defined in § 32.1-376. B. Notwithstanding the provisions of §38.2-3449.1, no health carrier shall (i) provide coverage for any gender transition procedures for individuals who are younger than 18 years of age or (ii) be required to provide coverage for any gender transition procedures for individuals 18 years of age or older.23100012D HOUSE BILL NO. 1399 Offered January 11, 2023 Prefiled November 30, 2022 A BILL to amend the Code of Virginia by adding sections numbered 22.1-206.3, 22.1-206.4, and 23.1-408.2, relating to elementary and secondary schools and institutions of higher education; interscholastic, intercollegiate, intramural, and club athletic teams and sports; student participation; certain requirements. ---------- Patron-- March ---------- Committee Referral Pending ---------- Be it enacted by the General Assembly of Virginia: 1. That the Code of Virginia is amended by adding sections numbered 22.1-206.3, 22.1-206.4, and 23.1-408.2 as follows: §22.1-206.3. Interscholastic, intramural, and club athletic teams and sports; student participation. A. For the purposes of this section, a statement of a student's biological sex on the student's official birth certificate shall be considered to correctly state the student's biological sex at birth if the statement was filed at or near the time of the student's birth. B. Each interscholastic, intramural, or club athletic team or sport that is sponsored by a public elementary or secondary school shall be expressly designated as one of the following based on each team member's biological sex at birth: 1. For "males," "men," or "boys"; 2. For "females," "women," or "girls"; or 3. As "coed" or "mixed," including both (i) males, men, or boys and (ii) females, women, or girls. C. No interscholastic, intramural, or club athletic team or sport that is sponsored by a public elementary or secondary school and that is expressly designated for "males," "men," or "boys" pursuant to subsection B shall be open to any student whose biological sex at birth is female unless such school does not sponsor such a team or sport that is expressly designated for "females," "women," or "girls" or as "coed" or "mixed." D. No interscholastic, intramural, or club athletic team or sport that is sponsored by a public elementary or secondary school and that is expressly designated for "females," "women," or "girls" pursuant to subsection B shall be open to any student whose biological sex at birth is male. E. No interscholastic or club athletic team or sport that is sponsored by a public elementary or secondary school shall compete against any interscholastic or club athletic team or sport that is sponsored by a private elementary or secondary school unless such private school complies with the applicable provisions of subsection B, C, or D, mutatis mutandis, for the team or sport that it sponsors. F. Any student who (i) is deprived of an athletic opportunity or suffers any other direct or indirect harm as a result of a violation of subsection B, C, D, or E or (ii) is subject to retaliation or other adverse action by an elementary or secondary school or athletic association or organization as a result of reporting a violation of subsection B, C, D, or E to an employee or representative of the school or athletic association or organization, or to any state or federal agency with oversight over elementary or secondary schools in the Commonwealth, may initiate a cause of action against the relevant school, provided that such cause of action is initiated within two years of such deprivation, harm, retaliation, or other adverse action. G. Any public elementary or secondary school that suffers any direct or indirect harm as a result of a violation of subsection B, C, D, or E by any governmental entity, licensing or accrediting organization, or athletic association or organization may initiate a cause of action against such entity, organization, or association, provided that such cause of action is initiated within two years of such harm. §22.1-206.4. Interscholastic competition; female wrestling. No school board shall use any funds or permit any school within the local school division to use any funds to join, affiliate with, pay dues or fees to, or in any way financially support any interscholastic athletic association, body, or entity unless the constitution, rules, or policies of such association, body, or entity recognizes, sanctions, and regulates interscholastic competition between wrestling teams exclusively comprised of students whose biological sex at birth is female. §23.1-408.2. Intercollegiate, intramural, and club athletic teams and sports; student participation. A. For the purposes of this section, a statement of a student's biological sex on the student's official birth certificate shall be considered to correctly state the student's biological sex at birth if the statement was filed at or near the time of the student's birth. B. Each intercollegiate, intramural, or club athletic team or sport that is sponsored by a public institution of higher education shall be expressly designated as one of the following based on each team member's biological sex at birth: 1. For "males," "men," or "boys"; 2. For "females," "women," or "girls"; or 3. As "coed" or "mixed," including both (i) males, men, or boys and (ii) females, women, or girls. C. No intercollegiate, intramural, or club athletic team or sport that is sponsored by a public institution of higher education and that is expressly designated for "males," "men," or "boys" pursuant to subsection B shall be open to any student whose biological sex at birth is female unless such institution does not sponsor such a team or sport that is expressly designated for "females," "women," or "girls" or as "coed" or "mixed." D. No intercollegiate, intramural, or club athletic team or sport that is sponsored by a public institution of higher education and that is expressly designated for "females," "women," or "girls" pursuant to subsection B shall be open to any student whose biological sex at birth is male. E. No intercollegiate or club athletic team or sport that is sponsored by a public institution of higher education shall compete against any intercollegiate or club athletic team or sport that is sponsored by a private institution of higher education unless such private institution complies with the applicable provisions of subsection B, C, or D, mutatis mutandis, for the team or sport that it sponsors. F. Any student who (i) is deprived of an athletic opportunity or suffers any other direct or indirect harm as a result of a violation of subsection B, C, D, or E or (ii) is subject to retaliation or other adverse action by a public institution of higher education or athletic association or organization as a result of reporting a violation of subsection B, C, D, or E to an employee or representative of the institution or athletic association or organization, or to any state or federal agency with oversight over public institutions of higher education in the Commonwealth, may initiate a cause of action against the relevant school, provided that such cause of action is initiated within two years of such deprivation, harm, retaliation, or other adverse action. G. Any public institution of higher education that suffers any direct or indirect harm as a result of a violation of subsection B, C, D, or E by any governmental entity, licensing or accrediting organization, or athletic association or organization may initiate a cause of action against such entity, organization, or association, provided that such cause of action is initiated within two years of such harm. Req. No. 5096 Page 1  STATE OF OKLAHOMA 1st Session of the 59th Legislature (2023) HOUSE BILL 1011 By: Olsen AS INTRODUCED An Act relating to public health and safety ; defining terms; prohibiting certain health care professionals from performing or attempting to perform gender transition procedures to certain individuals ; prohibiting certain health care professionals from making certain referrals ; providing exceptions ; prohibiting use of public funds for gender transition procedures ; prohibiting gender transition procedures under certain circumstances; prohibiting state Medicaid program reimbursements ; providing for felony penalties ; authorizing fine or confinement or both; prescribing statute of limitations ; defining certain conduct as unprofessional ; requiring revocation of license or certificate ; prescribing statute of limitations for disciplinary proceedings; authorizing certain claims or defenses ; prescribing statute of limitations ; authorizing civil actions by minors; authorizing civil actions after majority; authorizing certain actions without exhaustion of administrative remedies; authorizing attorney fees; authorizing Attorney General to bring enforcement actions; providing for construction of act; providing for codification ; and providing an effective date. BE IT ENACTED BY THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF OKLAHOMA: SECTION 1. A new section of law to be codified in the Oklahoma Statutes as Section 2607.1 of Title 63, unless there is created a duplication in numbering, reads as follows: Req. No. 5096 Page 2  As used in this act: 1. "Biological sex " means the biological indication of male and female in the context of reproductive potential or capacity, such as sex chromosomes, naturally occurring sex hormones, gonads, and nonambiguous internal and external genitalia present at birth, without regard to an individual 's psychological, chosen, or subjective experience of gender; 2. "Cross-sex hormones " means: a. testosterone or other androgens given to biological females in amounts that are larger or more potent than would normally occur naturally in healthy biological sex females , and b. estrogen given to biological males in amounts that are larger or more potent than would normally occur naturally in healthy biological sex males; 3. "Gender" means the psychological, behavioral, social, and cultural aspects of being male or female; 4. "Gender reassignment surgery " means any medical or surgical service that seeks to surgically alter or remove healthy physical or anatomical characteristics o r features that are typical for the individual 's biological sex, in order to instill or create physiological or anatomical characteristics that resemble a sex different from the individual 's biological sex, including but not limited to genital or nongenital gender reassignment surgery Req. No. 5096 Page 3  performed for the purpose of assisting an individual with a gender transition; 5. "Gender transition " means the process in which a person goes from identifying with and living as a gender that corresponds to his or her biological sex to identifying with and living as a gender different from his or her biological sex, and may involve social, legal, or physical changes; 6. a. "Gender transition procedures" means any medical or surgical service, including but not limited to physician's services, inpatient and outpatient hospital services, or prescribed drugs related to gender transition , that seeks to: (1) alter or remove physical or anatomical characteristics or features that are typical for the individual 's biological sex, or (2) instill or create physiological or anatomical characteristics that resemble a sex different from the individual 's biological sex, including but not limited to medical services that provide puberty-blocking drugs, cross -sex hormones, or other mechanisms to promote the development of feminizing or masculinizing features in the opposite biological sex, or genital or nongenital gender reassignment surgery performed for the Req. No. 5096 Page 4  purpose of assisting an individual with a gender transition. b. Gender transition procedures do not include : (1) services to persons born with a medically verifiable disorder of sex development, including a person with external biological s ex characteristics that are irresolvably ambiguous, such as those born with 46 XX chromosomes with virilization, 46 XY chromosomes with undervirilization, or having both ovarian and testicular tissue, (2) services provided when a physician has otherwise diagnosed a disorder of sexual development that the physician has determined through genetic or biochemical testing that the person does not have normal sex chromosome structure, sex steroid hormone production, or sex steroid hormone action, (3) the treatment of any infection, injury, disease, or disorder that has been caused by or exacerbated by the performance of gender transition procedures, whether or not the gender transition procedure was performed in accordance with state and federal law, or Req. No. 5096 Page 5  (4) any procedure undertaken because the individual suffers from a physical disorder, physical injury, or physical illness that would , as certified by a physician, place the individual in imminent danger of death or impairment of major bodily function unless surgery is performed; 7. "Genital gender reassignment surgery " means a medical procedure performed for the purpose of assisting a n individual with a gender transition, including but not limited to: a. surgical procedures such as penectomy, orchiectomy, vaginoplasty, clitoroplasty, or vulvoplasty for biologically male patients or hysterectomy or ovariectomy for biologically female patients, b. reconstruction of the fixed part of the urethra with or without a metoidioplasty, or c. phalloplasty, vaginectomy, scrotoplasty, or implantation of erection or testicular prostheses for biologically female patients; 8. "Health care professional " means a person who is licensed, certified, or otherwise authorized by the laws of this state to administer health care in the ordinary course of the practice of his or her profession; Req. No. 5096 Page 6  9. "Nongenital gender reassignment surgery " means medical procedures performed for the purpose of assisting an individual with a gender transition , including but not limited to: a. surgical procedures for biologically male patients, such as augmentation mammoplasty, facial feminization surgery, liposuction , lipofilling, voice surgery, thyroid cartilage reduction, gluteal augmentation, hair reconstruction, or various aesthetic procedures, or b. surgical procedures for biologically female patients, such as subcutaneous mastectomy, voice surgery, liposuction, lipofilling, pectoral implants, or various aesthetic procedures; 10. "Physician" means a person who is licensed to practice medicine in this state; 11. "Puberty-blocking drugs" means gonadotropin -releasing hormone analogues or other synthetic drugs used in biological male s to stop luteinizing hormone secretion and therefore testosterone secretion, or synthetic drugs used in biological females which stop the production of estrogens and progesterone, when used to delay or suppress pubertal development in children for the purpose of assisting an individual with a gender transition; and 12. "Public funds" means state, county, or local government monies, in addition to any department, agency, or instrumentality Req. No. 5096 Page 7  authorized or appropriated under state law or derived from any fund in which such monies are deposited. SECTION 2. A new section of law to be codified in the Oklahoma Statutes as Section 2607.2 of Title 63, unless there is created a duplication in numbering, reads as follows: A. A physician or other health care professional shall not perform or attempt to perform gender transition procedures to any individual under twenty-one (21) years of age. B. A physician or other health care professional shall not refer any individual under twenty-one (21) years of age to any health care professional for gender transition procedures. C. A physician or other health care professional is not prohibited from providing any of the following procedures which are not gender transition procedures to an individual under twenty-one (21) years of age: 1. Services to persons born with a medically verifiable disorder of sex development, including a person with external biological sex characteristics that are irresolvably ambiguous, such as those born with 46 XX chromosomes with virilization, 46 XY chromosomes with undervirilization, or having both ovarian and testicular tissue; 2. Services provided when a physician has otherwise diagnosed a disorder of sexual development that the physician has determined through genetic or biochemical testing that the person does not have Req. No. 5096 Page 8  normal sex chromosome structure, sex steroid hormone production, or sex steroid hormone action; 3. The treatment of any infection, injury, disease, or disorder that has been caused by or exacerbated by the performance of gender transition procedures, whether or not the gender transition procedure was performed in accordance with state and federal law or whether funding for the gender transition procedure is permissible under Section 3 of this act; or 4. Any procedure undertaken because the individual suffers from a physical disorder, physical injury, or physical illness that would, as certified by a physician, place the individual in imminent danger of death or impairment of major bodily function unless surgery is performed. SECTION 3. NEW LAW A new section of law to be codified in the Oklahoma Statutes as Section 2607.3 of Title 63, unless there is created a duplication in numbering, reads as follows: A. Public funds shall not be directly or indirectly used, granted, paid, or distributed to any entity, organization, or individual that provides gender transition procedures to an individual under twenty-one (21) years of age. Any violation shall result in the loss of such funding. B. Health care services furnished in the following situations shall not include gender transition procedures to an individual under twenty-one (21) years of age: Req. No. 5096 Page 9  1. By or in a health care facility owned by the state or a county or local government; or 2. By a physician or other healthcare professional employed by the state or a county or local government. C. The state Medicaid program shall not reimburse or provide coverage for gender transition procedures to an individual under twenty-one (21) years of age. SECTION 4. NEW LAW A new section of law to be codified in the Oklahoma Statutes as Section 2607.4 of Title 63, unless there is created a duplication in numbering, reads as follows: A. 1. As provided in subsection A of Section 2 of this act, a physician or other health care professional performing or attempting to perform gender transition procedures to any individual under twenty-one (21) years of age shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a felony punishable by fine not to exceed One Hundred Thousand Dollars ($100,000.00), or by confinement in the custody of the Department of Corrections for a term not to exceed ten (10) years, or by both such fine and imprisonment . 2. Prosecution for a criminal violation of this subsection shall be commenced not later than the date as of which the individual receiving gender transition procedures attains the age of forty-five (45 ) years. B. 1. As provided in subsection B of Section 2 of this act, a physician or other healthcare professional found to have knowingly Req. No. 5096 Page 10  referred any individual under twenty -one (21) years of age to any healthcare professional for gender transition procedures shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a felony. 2. Prosecution for a criminal violation of this subsection shall be commenced not later than the date as of which the individual receiving gender transition procedures attains the age of forty-five (45) years . C. 1. Any referral for or provision of gender transition procedures to an individual under twenty-one (21) years of age is unprofessional conduct and shall, upon an adverse ruling by the appropriate licensing board, result in immediate revocation of the license or certificate of the physician or other health care professional . 2. Disciplinary proceedings against the physician or other health care professional must be commenced not later than the date as of which the individual receiving gender transition procedures attains the age of forty-five (45) years . D. 1. A person may assert a n actual or threatened violation of this act as an independent civil action or defense in a judicial or administrative proceeding and obtain compensatory damages , injunctive relief, declaratory relief, or any other appropriate relief. Req. No. 5096 Page 11  2. A person shall bring a claim for a violation of this act no later than the date as of which the individual receiving gender transition procedures attains the age of forty-five (45) years . 3. An individual under eighteen (18) years of age may bring an action throughout their minority through a parent or next friend , and may bring an action in their own name upon reaching majority at any time from that point until twenty-seven (27) years after reaching the age of majority. 4. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, an action under this subsection may be commenced, and relief may be granted, in a judicial proceeding without regard to whether the person commencing the action has sought or exhausted available administrative remedies. 5. In any action or proceeding to enforce a provision of this act, a prevailing party who establishes a violation of this act shall recover reasonable attorney fees. E. 1. The Attorney General may bring an action to enforce compliance with this act. 2. This act does not deny, impair, or otherwise affect any right or authority of the Attorney General, the State of Oklahoma, or any agency, officer, or employee of the state, acting under any law other than this act, to institute or intervene in any proceeding. Req. No. 5096 Page 12  SECTION 5. This act shall become effective November 1, 2023. 59-1-5096 TJ 11/30/22 FIRST REGULAR SESSION HOUSE BILL NO. 183 102ND GENERAL ASSEMBLY INTRODUCED BY REPRESENTATIVE BURGER. DANA RADEMAN MILLER, Chief Clerk AN ACT 2 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 To amend chapter 163, RSMo, by adding thereto one new section relating to participation in athletic competitions. Be it enacted by the General Assembly of the state of Missouri, as follows: Section A. Chapter 163, RSMo, is amended by adding thereto one new section, to be known as section 163.048, to read as follows: 163.048. 1. As used in this section, the following terms mean: (1) "Athletics", any interscholastic athletic games, contests, programs, activities, exhibitions, or other similar competitions organized and provided for students; (2) "Sex", the two main categories of male and female into which individuals are divided based on an individual's reproductive biology at birth and the individual's genome. 2. (1) The general assembly hereby finds the following: (a) A noticeable disparity continues between the athletics participation rates of students who are male and students who are female; (b) Courts have recognized a legitimate and important governmental interest in redressing past discrimination against females in athletics on the basis of sex and promoting equality of athletic opportunity between the sexes under Title IX of the federal Education Amendments of 1972 (20 U.S.C. Section 1681 et seq.), as amended; and (c) Courts have recognized that classification by sex is the only feasible classification to promote the governmental interest of providing opportunities for athletics for females. EXPLANATION — Matter enclosed in bold-faced brackets [thus] in the above bill is not enacted and is intended to be omitted from the law. Matter in bold-face type in the above bill is proposed language. HB 183 2 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 (2) The general assembly hereby declares that it is the public policy of this state to further the governmental interest of ensuring that sufficient opportunities for athletics remain available for females to remedy past discrimination on the basis of sex. 3. (1) Except as provided under subdivision (2) of this subsection, no school district or charter school shall allow any student to compete in an athletics competition that is designated for the biological sex opposite to the student's biological sex as correctly stated on the student's official birth certificate as described in subsection 4 of this section or, if the student's official birth certificate is unobtainable, another government record. (2) A school district or charter school may allow a female student to compete in an athletics competition that is designated for male students if no corresponding athletics competition designated for female students is offered or available. 4. For purposes of this section, a statement of a student's biological sex on the student's official birth certificate or another government record shall be deemed to have correctly stated the student's biological sex only if the statement was: (1) Entered at or near the time of the student's birth; or (2) Modified to correct any scrivener's error in the student's biological sex. 5. No school district or charter school that violates subdivision (1) of subsection 3 of this section shall receive any state aid under this chapter or any other revenues from the state. 6. The department of elementary and secondary education shall promulgate all necessary rules and regulations for the implementation and administration of this section. Such rules and regulations shall ensure compliance with state and federal law regarding the confidentiality of student medical information. Any rule or portion of a rule, as that term is defined in section 536.010, that is created under the authority delegated in this section shall become effective only if it complies with and is subject to all of the provisions of chapter 536 and, if applicable, section 536.028. This section and chapter 536 are nonseverable and if any of the powers vested with the general assembly pursuant to chapter 536 to review, to delay the effective date, or to disapprove and annul a rule are subsequently held unconstitutional, then the grant of rulemaking authority and any rule proposed or adopted after August 28, 2023, shall be invalid and void. ✔ FIRST REGULAR SESSION SENATE BILL NO. 236 102ND GENERAL ASSEMBLY INTRODUCED BY SENATOR HOSKINS. 0356S.01I KRISTINA MARTIN, Secretary AN ACT To amend chapter 191, RSMo, by adding thereto one new section relating to gender transition procedures. Be it enacted by the General Assembly of the State of Missouri, as follows: Section A. Chapter 191, RSMo, is amended by adding thereto 1 one new section, to be known as section 191.1720, to read as 2 follows: 3 191.1720. 1. This section shall be known and may be 1 cited as the "Missouri Save Adolescents from Experimentation 2 (SAFE) Act". 3 2. For purposes of this section, the follo wing terms 4 mean: 5 (1) "Biological sex", the biological indication of 6 male or female in the context of reproductive potential or 7 capacity, such as sex chromosomes, naturally occurring sex 8 hormones, gonads, and nonambiguous internal and external 9 genitalia present at birth, without regard to an 10 individual's psychological, chosen, or subjective experience 11 of gender; 12 (2) "Cross-sex hormones": 13 (a) Testosterone or other androgens given to 14 biological sex females in amounts that are larger o r more 15 potent than would normally occur naturally in healthy 16 biological sex females; and 17 (b) Estrogen given to biological sex males in amounts 18 that are larger or more potent than would normally occur 19 naturally in healthy biological sex males; 20 SB 236 2 (3) "Gender", the psychological, behavioral, social, 21 and cultural aspects of being male or female; 22 (4) "Gender reassignment surgery", any medical or 23 surgical service that seeks to surgically alter or remove 24 healthy physical or anatomical charac teristics or features 25 that are typical for the individual's biological sex in 26 order to instill or create physiological or anatomical 27 characteristics that resemble a sex different from the 28 individual's biological sex, including, but not limited to, 29 genital or nongenital gender reassignment surgery performed 30 for the purpose of assisting an individual with a gender 31 transition; 32 (5) "Gender transition", the process in which an 33 individual transitions from identifying with and living as a 34 gender th at corresponds to his or her biological sex to 35 identifying and living as a gender different from his or her 36 biological sex, and may involve social, legal, or physical 37 changes; 38 (6) "Gender transition procedures": 39 (a) Any medical or surgical s ervice, including, but 40 not limited to, physician's services, inpatient and 41 outpatient hospital services, or prescribed drugs, related 42 to gender transition that seeks to: 43 a. Alter or remove physical or anatomical 44 characteristics or features that a re typical for the 45 individual's biological sex; or 46 b. Instill or create physiological or anatomical 47 characteristics that resemble a sex different from the 48 individual's biological sex, including, but not limited to: 49 (i) Medical services that provide puberty -blocking 50 drugs, cross -sex hormones, or other mechanisms to promote 51 SB 236 3 the development of feminizing or masculinizing features in 52 the opposite biological sex; or 53 (ii) Genital or nongenital gender reassignment surgery 54 performed for the purpose of assisting an individual with a 55 gender transition; 56 (b) The term "gender transition procedures'' shall not 57 include: 58 a. Services to individuals born with a medically - 59 verifiable disorder of sex development, including, but not 60 limited to, an individual with external biological sex 61 characteristics that are irresolvably ambiguous, such as 62 those born with forty -six XX chromosomes with virilization, 63 forty-six XY chromosomes with undervirilization, or having 64 both ovarian and testicular tissue; 65 b. Services provided when a physician has otherwise 66 diagnosed an individual with a disorder of sexual 67 development and determined through genetic or biochemical 68 testing that the individual does not have normal sex 69 chromosome structure, sex steroid hormone production, or sex 70 steroid hormone action; 71 c. The treatment of any infection, injury, disease, or 72 disorder that has been caused by or exacerbated by the 73 performance of gender transition procedures regardless of 74 whether the gender transition procedure was performed in 75 accordance with state and federal law; or 76 d. Any procedure undertaken because the individual 77 suffers from a physical disorder, physical injury, or 78 physical illness that would, as certified by a physician, 79 place the individual in imminent danger of death or 80 impairment of a major bodily function unless surgery is 81 performed; 82 SB 236 4 (7) "Genital gender reassignment surgery", a medical 83 procedure performed for the purpose of assisting an 84 individual with a gende r transition, including, but not 85 limited to: 86 (a) Surgical procedures such as penectomy, 87 orchiectomy, vaginoplasty, clitoroplasty, or vulvoplasty for 88 biologically male patients or hysterectomy or ovariectomy 89 for biologically female patients; 90 (b) Reconstruction of the fixed part of the urethra 91 with or without a metoidioplasty; or 92 (c) Phalloplasty, vaginectomy, scrotoplasty, or 93 implantation of erection or testicular prostheses for 94 biologically female patients; 95 (8) "Health care pr ovider", an individual who is 96 licensed, certified, or otherwise authorized by the laws of 97 this state to administer health care in the ordinary course 98 of the practice of his or her profession; 99 (9) "Nongenital gender reassignment surgery", medical 100 procedures performed for the purpose of assisting an 101 individual with a gender transition, including, but not 102 limited to: 103 (a) Surgical procedures for biologically male 104 patients, such as augmentation mammoplasty, facial 105 feminization surgery, liposu ction, lipofilling, voice 106 surgery, thyroid cartilage reduction, gluteal augmentation, 107 hair reconstruction, or various aesthetic procedures; or 108 (b) Surgical procedures for biologically female 109 patients, such as subcutaneous mastectomy, voice surgery , 110 liposuction, lipofilling, pectoral implants, or various 111 aesthetic procedures; 112 (10) "Physician", an individual who is licensed under 113 chapter 334; 114 SB 236 5 (11) "Puberty -blocking drugs", gonadotropin -releasing 115 hormone analogues or other synthetic drugs used in 116 biological sex males to stop luteinizing hormone secretion 117 and therefore testosterone secretion, or synthetic drugs 118 used in biological sex females that stop the production of 119 estrogens and progesterone, when used to delay or suppress 120 pubertal development in children for the purpose of 121 assisting an individual with a gender transition. 122 3. A physician or other health care provider shall not 123 provide gender transition procedures to any individual under 124 eighteen years of age and shall not refer any individual 125 under eighteen years of age to any health care provider for 126 gender transition procedures. 127 4. Any referral for or provision of gender transition 128 procedures to an individual under eighteen years of age 129 shall be considered unprofessional conduct and any health 130 care provider doing so may be subject to discipline by the 131 appropriate licensing entity or disciplinary review board 132 with competent jurisdiction in this state. 133 5. The provision of gender transition procedures to an 134 individual under eighteen years of age in violation of the 135 provisions of this section shall be considered grounds for a 136 cause of action against the health care provider for 137 personal injury or death under chapter 538 and such cause of 138 action shall b e governed by the provisions of such chapter. 139 An individual under eighteen years of age upon whom gender 140 transition procedures were performed in violation of this 141 section may bring the cause of action either through a next 142 friend or his or her own name, subject to the provisions of 143 section 516.105. 144  FIRST REGULAR SESSION SENATE BILL NO. 49 102ND GENERAL ASSEMBLY INTRODUCED BY SENATOR MOON. 0202S.01I KRISTINA MARTIN, Secretary AN ACT To amend chapter 191, RSMo, by adding thereto one new section relating to gender transition procedures. Be it enacted by the General Assembly of the State of Missouri, as follows: Section A. Chapter 191, RSMo, is amended by adding thereto 1 one new section, to be known as section 191.1720, to read as 2 follows: 3 191.1720. 1. This section shall be known and may be 1 cited as the "Missouri Save Adolescents from Experimentation 2 (SAFE) Act". 3 2. For purposes of this section, the following t erms 4 mean: 5 (1) "Biological sex", the biological indication of 6 male or female in the context of reproductive potential or 7 capacity, such as sex chromosomes, naturally occurring sex 8 hormones, gonads, and nonambiguous internal and external 9 genitali a present at birth, without regard to an 10 individual's psychological, chosen, or subjective experience 11 of gender; 12 (2) "Cross-sex hormones": 13 (a) Testosterone or other androgens given to 14 biological sex females in amounts that are larger or more 15 potent than would normally occur naturally in healthy 16 biological sex females; and 17 (b) Estrogen given to biological sex males in amounts 18 that are larger or more potent than would normally occur 19 naturally in healthy biological sex males; 20 SB 49 2 (3) "Gender", the psychological, behavioral, social, 21 and cultural aspects of being male or female; 22 (4) "Gender reassignment surgery", any medical or 23 surgical service that seeks to surgically alter or remove 24 healthy physical or anatomical characterist ics or features 25 that are typical for the individual's biological sex in 26 order to instill or create physiological or anatomical 27 characteristics that resemble a sex different from the 28 individual's biological sex, including, but not limited to, 29 genital or nongenital gender reassignment surgery performed 30 for the purpose of assisting an individual with a gender 31 transition; 32 (5) "Gender transition", the process in which an 33 individual transitions from identifying with and living as a 34 gender that cor responds to his or her biological sex to 35 identifying and living as a gender different from his or her 36 biological sex, and may involve social, legal, or physical 37 changes; 38 (6) "Gender transition procedures": 39 (a) Any medical or surgical service , including, but 40 not limited to, physician's services, inpatient and 41 outpatient hospital services, or prescribed drugs, related 42 to gender transition that seeks to: 43 a. Alter or remove physical or anatomical 44 characteristics or features that are typical for the 45 individual's biological sex; or 46 b. Instill or create physiological or anatomical 47 characteristics that resemble a sex different from the 48 individual's biological sex, including, but not limited to: 49 (i) Medical services that provide puberty -blocking 50 drugs, cross -sex hormones, or other mechanisms to promote 51 SB 49 3 the development of feminizing or masculinizing features in 52 the opposite biological sex; or 53 (ii) Genital or nongenital gender reassignment surgery 54 performed for the purpose of assisting an individual with a 55 gender transition; 56 (b) The term "gender transition procedures" shall not 57 include: 58 a. Services to individuals born with a medically - 59 verifiable disorder of sex development, including, but not 60 limited to, a n individual with external biological sex 61 characteristics that are irresolvably ambiguous, such as 62 those born with forty -six XX chromosomes with virilization, 63 forty-six XY chromosomes with undervirilization, or having 64 both ovarian and testicular tissue ; 65 b. Services provided when a physician has otherwise 66 diagnosed an individual with a disorder of sexual 67 development and determined through genetic or biochemical 68 testing that the individual does not have normal sex 69 chromosome structure, sex steroid hormone production, or sex 70 steroid hormone action; 71 c. The treatment of any infection, injury, disease, or 72 disorder that has been caused by or exacerbated by the 73 performance of gender transition procedures regardless of 74 whether the gender transition procedure was performed in 75 accordance with state and federal law; or 76 d. Any procedure undertaken because the individual 77 suffers from a physical disorder, physical injury, or 78 physical illness that would, as certified by a physician, 79 place th e individual in imminent danger of death or 80 impairment of a major bodily function unless surgery is 81 performed; 82 SB 49 4 (7) "Genital gender reassignment surgery", a medical 83 procedure performed for the purpose of assisting an 84 individual with a gender tran sition, including, but not 85 limited to: 86 (a) Surgical procedures such as penectomy, 87 orchiectomy, vaginoplasty, clitoroplasty, or vulvoplasty for 88 biologically male patients or hysterectomy or ovariectomy 89 for biologically female patients; 90 (b) Reconstruction of the fixed part of the urethra 91 with or without a metoidioplasty; or 92 (c) Phalloplasty, vaginectomy, scrotoplasty, or 93 implantation of erection or testicular prostheses for 94 biologically female patients; 95 (8) "Health care provider ", an individual who is 96 licensed, certified, or otherwise authorized by the laws of 97 this state to administer health care in the ordinary course 98 of the practice of his or her profession; 99 (9) "Nongenital gender reassignment surgery", medical 100 procedures performed for the purpose of assisting an 101 individual with a gender transition, including, but not 102 limited to: 103 (a) Surgical procedures for biologically male 104 patients, such as augmentation mammoplasty, facial 105 feminization surgery, liposuction, lipofilling, voice 106 surgery, thyroid cartilage reduction, gluteal augmentation, 107 hair reconstruction, or various aesthetic procedures; or 108 (b) Surgical procedures for biologically female 109 patients, such as subcutaneous mastectomy, voice surgery, 110 liposuction, lipofilling, pectoral implants, or various 111 aesthetic procedures; 112 (10) "Physician", an individual who is licensed under 113 chapter 334; 114 SB 49 5 (11) "Puberty -blocking drugs", gonadotropin -releasing 115 hormone analogues or other synthetic drugs used in 116 biological sex males to stop luteinizing hormone secretion 117 and therefore testosterone secretion, or synthetic drugs 118 used in biological sex females that stop the production of 119 estrogens and progesterone, when used to delay or suppress 120 pubertal development in children for the purpose of 121 assisting an individual with a gender transition. 122 3. A physician or other health care provider shall not 123 provide gender transition procedures to any individual under 124 eighteen years of age and shall not refer any individual 125 under eighteen years of age to any health care provider for 126 gender transition procedures. 127 4. Any referral for or provision of gender transition 128 procedures to an individual under eighteen years of age 129 shall be considered unprofessional conduct and any health 130 care provider doing so may be subject to discipline by the 131 appropriate licensing entity or disciplinary review board 132 with competent jurisdiction in this state. 133 5. The provision of gender transition procedures to an 134 individual under eighteen years of age in violation of the 135 provisions of this section shall be considered grounds for a 136 cause of action against the health care provider for 137 personal injury or death under chapter 538 and such cause of 138 action shall be governed by the provisions of such chapter. 139 An individual under eighteen years of age upon whom gender 140 transition procedures were performed in violation of this 141 section may bring the cause of action either through a next 142 friend or his or her own name, subject to the provisions of 143 section 516.105. 144  EXPLANATION -Matter enclosed in bold -faced brackets [thus] in this bill is not enacted and is intended to be omitted in the law. FIRST REGULAR SESSION SENATE BILL NO. 164 102ND GENERAL ASSEMBLY INTRODUCED BY SENATOR CARTER. 1196S.01I KRISTINA MARTIN, Secretary AN ACT To repeal section 568.060, RSMo, and to enact in lieu thereof two new sections relating to gender transition procedures, with existing penalty provisions. Be it enacted by the General Assembly of the State of Missouri, as follows: Section A. Section 568.060, RSMo, is repealed and two new 1 sections enacted in lieu thereof, to be known as sections 2 191.1720 and 568.060, to read as follows: 3 191.1720. 1. This section shall be known and may be 1 cited as the "Missouri Save Adolescents from Experimentation 2 (SAFE) Act". 3 2. For purposes of this section, the following terms 4 mean: 5 (1) "Biological sex", the bi ological indication of the 6 physical condition of being male or female, which is 7 determined by a person's chromosomes, identified at birth by 8 a person's anatomy, and indicated on their birth 9 certificate, without regard to an individual's 10 psychological, chosen, or subjective experience of gender; 11 (2) "Cross-sex hormones": 12 (a) Testosterone or other androgens given to 13 biological sex females in amounts that are larger or more 14 potent than would normally occur naturally in healthy 15 biological se x females; and 16 SB 164 2 (b) Estrogen given to biological sex males in amounts 17 that are larger or more potent than would normally occur 18 naturally in healthy biological sex males; 19 (3) "Gender", the psychological, behavioral, social, 20 and cultural aspect s of being male or female; 21 (4) "Gender reassignment surgery", any medical or 22 surgical service that alters or removes physical or 23 anatomical characteristics of an individual's biological sex 24 for the purpose of gender transition; 25 (5) "Gender transition", the process in which an 26 individual transitions from his or her biological sex to a 27 gender different from his or her biological sex, which may 28 involve social, legal, or physical changes; 29 (6) "Gender transition procedures": 30 (a) Any medical or surgical service, including, but 31 not limited to, physician's services, inpatient and 32 outpatient hospital services, or prescribed drugs, related 33 to gender transition that seeks to: 34 a. Alter or remove physical or anatomical 35 characterist ics or features that are typical for the 36 individual's biological sex; or 37 b. Instill or create physiological or anatomical 38 characteristics that resemble a sex different from the 39 individual's biological sex, including, but not limited to: 40 (i) Medical services that provide puberty -blocking 41 drugs, cross -sex hormones, or other mechanisms to promote 42 the development of feminizing or masculinizing features in 43 the opposite biological sex; or 44 (ii) Genital or nongenital gender reassignment surgery 45 performed for the purpose of assisting an individual with a 46 gender transition; 47 SB 164 3 (b) The term "gender transition procedures" shall not 48 include: 49 a. Services to individuals born with medically - 50 verifiable disorders of sex development, including 51 individuals with external biological sex characteristics 52 that are irresolvably ambiguous, such as those born with 53 forty-six XX chromosomes with virilization or forty -six XY 54 chromosomes with undervirilization; 55 b. Services provided when a physician has otherwise 56 diagnosed an individual with a disorder of sexual 57 development and determined through genetic or biochemical 58 testing that the individual does not have normal sex 59 chromosome structure, sex steroid hormone production, or sex 60 steroid hormone action; or 61 c. The treatment of any infection, injury, disease, or 62 disorder that has been caused by or exacerbated by the 63 performance of gender transition procedures regardless of 64 whether the gender transition procedure was performed in 65 accordance with state and federal law; 66 (7) "Genital gender reassignment surgery", a medical 67 procedure performed for the purpose of assisting an 68 individual with a gender transition, including, but not 69 limited to: 70 (a) Surgical procedures such as p enectomy, 71 orchiectomy, vaginoplasty, clitoroplasty, or vulvoplasty for 72 biologically male patients or hysterectomy or ovariectomy 73 for biologically female patients; 74 (b) Reconstruction of the fixed part of the urethra 75 with or without a metoidioplast y; or 76 (c) Phalloplasty, vaginectomy, scrotoplasty, or 77 implantation of erection or testicular prostheses for 78 biologically female patients; 79 SB 164 4 (8) "Health care provider", an individual who is 80 licensed, certified, or otherwise authorized by the la ws of 81 this state to administer health care in the ordinary course 82 of the practice of his or her profession; 83 (9) "Nongenital gender reassignment surgery", medical 84 procedures performed for the purpose of assisting an 85 individual with a gender transi tion, including, but not 86 limited to: 87 (a) Surgical procedures for biologically male 88 patients, such as augmentation mammoplasty, facial 89 feminization surgery, liposuction, lipofilling, voice 90 surgery, thyroid cartilage reduction, gluteal augmentation , 91 hair reconstruction, or various aesthetic procedures; or 92 (b) Surgical procedures for biologically female 93 patients, such as subcutaneous mastectomy, voice surgery, 94 liposuction, lipofilling, pectoral implants, or various 95 aesthetic procedures; 96 (10) "Physician", an individual who is licensed under 97 chapter 334; 98 (11) "Puberty -blocking drugs", gonadotropin -releasing 99 hormone analogues or other synthetic drugs used in 100 biological sex males to stop luteinizing hormone secretion 101 and therefore testosterone secretion, or synthetic drugs 102 used in biological sex females that stop the production of 103 estrogens and progesterone, when used to delay or suppress 104 pubertal development in children for the purpose of 105 assisting an individual with a gender transition. 106 3. A physician or other health care provider shall not 107 provide gender transition procedures to any individual under 108 eighteen years of age and shall not refer any individual 109 under eighteen years of age to any health care provider for 110 gender transition procedures. 111 SB 164 5 4. Any physician or health care provider who willfully 112 and knowingly does or assists any prohibited action under 113 subsection 3 of this section shall have his or her license, 114 application for license, or authority to practice his or her 115 profession as a physician, surgeon, nurse, or other health 116 care provider in the state of Missouri rejected or revoked 117 by his or her respective licensing board. 118 5. The provision of gender transition procedures to an 119 individual under eighteen years of age in violation of the 120 provisions of this section shall be considered grounds for a 121 cause of action against the health care provider for 122 personal injury or death under chapter 538 and such cause of 123 action shall be governed by the provisions of such chapter. 124 An individual under eighteen years of age upon whom gender 125 transition procedures were performed in violation of this 126 section may bring the cause of action either through a next 127 friend or his or her own name, subject to the provisions of 128 section 516.105. 129 568.060. 1. As used in this section, the following 1 terms shall mean: 2 (1) "Abuse", the infliction of physical, sexual, or 3 mental injury against a child by any person eighteen years 4 of age or older. For purposes of this section, abuse shall 5 not include injury inflicted on a child by accidental means 6 by a person with care, custody, or control of the child, or 7 discipline of a child by a person with care, custody, or 8 control of the child, includi ng spanking, in a reasonable 9 manner; 10 (2) "Abusive head trauma", a serious physical injury 11 to the head or brain caused by any means, including but not 12 limited to shaking, jerking, pushing, pulling, slamming, 13 hitting, or kicking; 14 SB 164 6 (3) "Mental injury", an injury to the intellectual or 15 psychological capacity or the emotional condition of a child 16 as evidenced by an observable and substantial impairment of 17 the ability of the child to function within his or her 18 normal range of performance or beh avior; 19 (4) "Neglect", the failure to provide, by those 20 responsible for the care, custody, and control of a child 21 under the age of eighteen years, the care reasonable and 22 necessary to maintain the physical and mental health of the 23 child, when such failure presents a substantial probability 24 that death or physical injury or sexual injury would result; 25 (5) "Physical injury", physical pain, illness, or any 26 impairment of physical condition, including but not limited 27 to bruising, lacerations, he matomas, welts, or permanent or 28 temporary disfigurement and impairment of any bodily 29 function or organ; 30 (6) "Serious emotional injury", an injury that creates 31 a substantial risk of temporary or permanent medical or 32 psychological damage, manifeste d by impairment of a 33 behavioral, cognitive, or physical condition. Serious 34 emotional injury shall be established by testimony of 35 qualified experts upon the reasonable expectation of 36 probable harm to a reasonable degree of medical or 37 psychological certainty; 38 (7) "Serious physical injury", a physical injury that 39 creates a substantial risk of death or that causes serious 40 disfigurement or protracted loss or impairment of the 41 function of any part of the body. 42 2. A person commits the offense of abuse or neglect of 43 a child if such person knowingly causes a child who is less 44 than eighteen years of age: 45 SB 164 7 (1) To suffer physical or mental injury as a result of 46 abuse or neglect; or 47 (2) To be placed in a situation in which the child may 48 suffer physical or mental injury as the result of abuse or 49 neglect. 50 3. A person commits the offense of abuse or neglect of 51 a child if such person recklessly causes a child who is less than eighteen years of age to suffer from abusive head 53 trauma. 54 4. A person commits the offense of abuse or neglect of 55 a child if such person coerces a child who is less than 56 eighteen years of age to undergo any surgical or hormonal 57 treatment for the purpose of gender reassignment, as such 58 term is defined in section 191.1720. 59 5. A person does not commit the offense of abuse or 60 neglect of a child by virtue of the sole fact that the 61 person delivers or allows the delivery of a child to a 62 provider of emergency services. 63 [5.]6. The offense of abuse or neglect of a child is: 64 (1) A class D felony, without eligibility for 65 probation, parole, or conditional release until the 66 defendant has served no less than one year of such sentence, 67 unless the person has previously been found guilty of a 68 violation of this section or of a violation of the law of 69 any other jurisdiction that prohibits the same or similar 70 conduct or the injury inflicted on the child is a serious 71 emotional injury or a serious physical injury, in which case 72 abuse or neglect of a child is a class B felony, without 73 eligibility for probation or parole until the defendant has 74 served not less than five years of such sentence; or 75 SB 164 8 (2) A class A felony if the child dies as a result of 76 injuries sustained from conduct chargeable under the 77 provisions of this section. 78 [6.]7. Notwithstanding subsection [5]6 of this section 79 to the contrary, the offense of abuse or neglect of a child 80 is a class A felony, without eligibility for probation, 81 parole, or conditional release until the defendant has 82 served not less than fifteen years of such sentence, if: 83 (1) The injury is a serious emotional injury or a 84 serious physical injury; 85 (2) The child is less than fourteen years of age; and 86 (3) The injury is the result of sexual abuse or sexual 87 abuse in the first degree as defined under section 566.100 88 or sexual exploitation of a minor as defined under section 89 573.023. 90 [7.]8. The circuit or prosecuting attorney may refer a 91 person who is suspected of abuse or neglect of a child to an 92 appropriate public or private agency for treatment or 93 counseling so long as the agency has consented to taking 94 such referrals. Nothing in this subsection shall limit the 95 discretion of the circuit or prosecuting attorney to 96 prosecute a person who has been referred for treatment or 97 counseling pursuant to this subsection. 98 [8.]9. Nothing in this section shall be construed to 99 alter the requirement that every element of any crime 100 referred to herein must be proven beyond a reasonable doubt. 101 [9.]10. Discipline, including spanking administered in 102 a reasonable manner, shall not be construed to be abuse 103 under this section. 104  2023-2024 Bill 243 Text of Previous Version (Dec. 02, 2022) - South Carolina Legislature Online South Carolina General Assembly 125th Session, 2023-2024 Bill 243 Indicates Matter StrickenIndicates New Matter(Text matches printed bills. Document has been reformatted to meet World Wide Web specifications.) A bill to amend the South Carolina Code of Laws by adding Section 40-47-205, RELATING TO GENERAL PROVISIONS CONCERNING PHYSICIANS, so as to PROHIBIT PHYSICIANS FROM PERFORMING GENDER REASSIGNMENT SURGERY ON MINORS, AND TO PROHIBIT PHYSICIANS FROM PRESCRIBING OR ADMINISTERING CERTAIN SUBSTANCES FOR THE PURPOSE OF ATTEMPTING TO ALTER THE APPEARANCE OF OR AFFIRM THE MINOR’S PERCEPTION OF HIS GENDER IF THAT APPEARANCE OR PERCEPTION IS INCONSISTENT WITH THE MINOR’S BIOLOGICAL SEX. Be it enacted by the General Assembly of the State of South Carolina: SECTION 1. Article 1, Chapter 47, Title 40 of the S.C. Code is amended by adding: Section 4047205. (A) For the purposes of this section: (1) “Biological sex” means the biological indication of male and female in the context of reproductive potential or capacity, such as sex chromosomes, naturally occurring sex hormones, gonads and nonambiguous internal and external genitalia present at birth, without regard to an individual’s psychological, chosen, or subjective experience of gender. (2) “Gender” means the psychological, behavioral, social, and cultural aspects of being male or female. (3) “Gender transition” means the process in which a person goes from identifying with and living as a gender that corresponds to the person’s biological sex to identifying with and living as a gender different from the person’s biological sex and may involve social, legal, or physical changes. (4) “Irreversible gender reassignment surgery” means a medical procedure performed for the purpose of assisting an individual with a gender transition, including, but not limited to: (a) penectomy, orchiectomy, vaginoplasty, clitoroplasty, or vulvoplasty for biologically male patients or hysterectomy or ovariectomy for biologically female patients; (b) metoidioplasty, phalloplasty, vaginectomy, scrotoplasty, or implantation of erection or testicular prostheses for biologically female patients; and (c) augmentation mammoplasty for biologically male patients and subcutaneous mastectomy for female patients. (B) A physician may not provide irreversible reassignment surgery to a minor. (C) A physician may not prescribe or administer puberty blocking medication to stop or delay normal puberty, supraphysiologic doses of testosterone or other androgens to females, or supraphysiologic doses of estrogen to males for the purpose of attempting to alter the appearance of or affirm the minor’s perception of his gender if that appearance or perception is inconsistent with the minor’s biological sex. (D) A physician may provide to a minor: (1) services to a minor born with a medically verifiable disorder of sex development, including, but not limited to, an individual with external biological sex characteristics that are irresolvably ambiguous; (2) services provided when a physician has otherwise diagnosed a disorder of sexual development and has determined through genetic or biochemical testing that the individual does not have normal sex chromosome structure, sex steroid hormone production or sex steroid hormone action; (3) treatment for an infection, injury, disease, or disorder that has been caused or exacerbated by the performance of a gender transition procedure, whether or not the gender transition procedure was performed in accordance with state or federal law; and (4) any procedure undertaken because the minor suffers from a physical disorder, physical injury, or physical illness that would place the individual in imminent danger of death or the impairment of a major bodily function unless surgery is performed. SECTION 2. This act takes effect upon approval by the Governor. XX ----XX----This web page was last updated on December 02, 2022 at 10:27 AM 2023-2024 Bill 274 Text of Previous Version (Dec. 07, 2022) - South Carolina Legislature Online South Carolina General Assembly 125th Session, 2023-2024 Bill 274 Indicates Matter StrickenIndicates New Matter(Text matches printed bills. Document has been reformatted to meet World Wide Web specifications.) A bill to amend the South Carolina Code of Laws by adding Section 40-47-300 so as to provide definitions; by adding Section 40-47-310 so as to provide that a person younger than twenty-one years of age may not undergo gender transition procedures; by adding Section 40-47-320 so as to provide that a person younger than twenty-one years of age may receive appropriate medical services otherwise related to gender transition procedures under limited circumstances; by adding Section 40-47-330 so as to provide prerequisites for a person older than twenty-one years of age to undergo gender transition procedures; by adding Section 40-47-340 so as to provide that no public funds may be used to pay for gender transition procedures; and by adding Section 59-32-35 so as to provide that gender identity disorders may be taught as part of a comprehensive health education program, to provide that students with gender identity disorders must be encouraged seek mental health treatment for the disorder and must not be encouraged to seek gender transition procedures, and to provide that school personnel must notify parents when they learn that a student suffers from a gender identity disorder. Be it enacted by the General Assembly of the State of South Carolina: SECTION 1.Chapter 47, Title 40 of the S.C. Code is amended by adding: Article 3 Gender Reassignment Procedures Section 40-47-300.For the purposes of this article: (1) "Biological sex" means the biological indication of male and female in the context of reproductive potential or capacity, such as sex chromosomes, naturally occurring sex hormones, gonads, and nonambiguous internal and external genitalia present at birth, without regard to an individual's psychological, chosen, or subjective experience of gender. (2) "Cross-sex hormones'' means testosterone or other androgens given to biological females in amounts that are larger or more potent than would normally occur naturally in healthy biological sex females; and estrogen given to biological males in amounts that are larger or more potent than would normally occur naturally in healthy biological sex males; (3) "Gender" means the psychological, behavioral, social, and cultural aspects of being male or female. (4) "Gender reassignment surgery" means any medical or surgical service that seeks to surgically alter or remove healthy physical or anatomical characteristics or features that are typical for the individual's biological sex, in order to instill or create physiological or anatomical characteristics that resemble a sex different from the individual's biological sex, including without limitation, genital or nongenital gender reassignment surgery performed for the purpose of assisting an individual with a gender transition. (5) "Gender transition" means the process in which a person goes from identifying with and living as a gender that corresponds to his or her biological sex to identifying with and living as a gender different from his or her biological sex, and may involve social, legal, or physical changes. (6) "Gender transition procedures'' means any medical or surgical service, including without limitation physician's services, inpatient and outpatient hospital services, or prescribed drugs related to gender transition that seeks to: (a) alter or remove physical or anatomical characteristics or features that are typical for the individual's biological sex; or (b) instill or create physiological or anatomical characteristics that resemble a sex different from the individual's biological sex, including without limitation medical services that provide puberty-blocking drugs, cross-sex hormones, or other mechanisms to promote the development of feminizing or masculinizing features in the opposite biological sex, or genital or nongenital gender reassignment surgery performed for the purpose of assisting an individual with a gender transition. (7) "Genital gender reassignment surgery" means a medical procedure performed for the purpose of assisting an individual with a gender transition, including without limitation: (a) surgical procedures such as penectomy, orchiectomy, vaginoplasty, clitoroplasty, or vulvoplasty for biologically male patients or hysterectomy or ovariectomy for biologically female patients; (b) reconstruction of the fixed part of the urethra with or without a metoidioplasty; or (c) phalloplasty, vaginectomy, scrotoplasty, or implantation of erection or testicular prostheses for biologically female patients, (8) "Nongenital gender reassignment surgery" means medical procedures performed for the purpose of assisting an individual with a gender transition including without limitation: (a) surgical procedures for biologically male patients, such as augmentation mammoplasty, facial feminization surgery, liposuction, lipofilling, voice surgery, thyroid cartilage reduction, gluteal augmentation, hair reconstruction, or various aesthetic procedures; or (b) surgical procedures for biologically female patients, such as subcutaneous mastectomy, voice surgery, liposuction, lipofilling, pectoral implants, or various aesthetic procedures. (9) "Puberty-blocking drugs" means gonadotropin-releasing hormone analogues or other synthetic drugs used in biological males to stop luteinizing hormone secretion and therefore testosterone secretion, or synthetic drugs used in biological females which stop the production of estrogens and progesterone, when used to delay or suppress pubertal development in children for the purpose of assisting an individual with a gender transition. (10) "Public funds" means state, county, or local government monies, in addition to any department, agency, or instrumentality authorized or appropriated under state law or derived from any fund in which such moneys are deposited. Section 40-47-310.A person younger than twenty-one years of age may not undergo gender transition procedures. Section 40-47-320.Notwithstanding the provisions contained in Section 4-47-310, a physician may provide to a patient who is under twenty-one years of age: (1) appropriate medical services to a person who was born with a medically verifiable disorder of sexual development, including, but not limited to, a person with external biological sexual characteristics that are ambiguous, including, but not limited to, people who were born with forty-six XX chromosomes with virilization or forty-six XY chromosomes with undervirilization or having both ovarian and testicular tissue; (2) appropriate medical services to treat a disorder of sexual development arising because the person does not have normal sex chromosome structure, sex steroid hormone production, or sex steroid hormone action that was diagnosed through genetic or biochemical testing; (3) treatment of any infection, injury, disease, or disorder that has been caused by or exacerbated by the performance of gender transition procedures, whether or not the gender transition procedure was performed in accordance with state or federal law; and (4) any procedure undertaken because the person suffers from a physical disorder, physical injury, or physical illness that would, as certified by a physician, place the person in imminent danger of death or impairment of a major bodily function unless treated by the physician. Section 40-47-330.In order for a person twenty-one years of age or older to receive gender transition procedures, he must first obtain a referral from his primary care physician and a referral from a licensed psychiatrist who must certify that the person has been diagnosed with gender dysphoria or a similar condition by the psychiatrist and that the psychiatrist believes that gender transition procedures would be appropriate for the person. Section 40-47-340.Public funds may not be used directly or indirectly for gender reassignment services. SECTION 2.Chapter 32, Title 59 of the S.C. Code is amended by adding: Section 59-32-35.(A) A comprehensive health education program may include instruction concerning gender dysphoria, gender identity disorder, and other psychological conditions that can result in a person identifying with a gender different than that of their sex assigned at birth or sex-related physical characteristics. (B) Instruction provided to students pursuant to subsection (A) must: (1) encourage students who are afflicted with a gender identity condition to seek assistance from a mental health professional; and (2) not encourage a student to pursue gender transition procedures, as defined in Section 40-47-300. (C) A teacher, school administrator, or other school employee who suspects or knows that a student suffers from gender dysphoria, gender identity disorder, and other psychological conditions that can result in a person identifying with a gender different than that of their sex assigned at birth or sex-related physical characteristics must notify the student's parent or legal guardian. The provisions in this subsection apply whether or not the teacher, school administrator, or school employee learns of the student's condition through instruction provided for in this section or otherwise. SECTION 3.This act takes effect upon approval by the Governor. ----XX---- This web page was last updated on December 07, 2022 at 02:32 PM S.B. 16 LEGISLATIVE GENERAL COUNSEL 6 Approved for Filing: C. Williams 6 6 12-16-22 2:09 PM 6S.B. 1 6 1 SEX CHARACTERISTIC SURGICAL PROCEDURES 2 2023 GENERAL SESSION 3 STATE OF UTAH 4 Chief Sponsor: Mi chael S. Kennedy 5 House Sponsor: ____________ 6 7 LONG TITLE 8 Committee Note: 9 The Health and Human Services Interim Committee recommended this bill. 10 Legislative Vote: 12 voting for 5 voting against 1 absent 11 General Description: 12 This bill enacts provisions regarding sex characteristic surgical procedures. 13 Highlighted Provisions: 14 This bill: 15 <defines terms; 16 <prohibits performing sex characteristic surgical procedures on a minor for the 17 purpose of effectuating a sex change; and 18 <makes technical chang es. 19 Money Appropriated in this Bill: 20 None 21 Other Special Clauses: 22 None 23 Utah Code Sections Affected: 24 AMENDS: 25 58-67-102 , as last amended by Laws of Utah 2022, Chapter 233 26 58-67-502 , as last amended by Laws of Utah 2021, Chapter 337 27 58-68-102 , as last amended by Laws of Utah 2022, Chapter 233 *SB0016*S.B. 1 6 12-16-22 2:09 PM - 2 -28 58-68-502 , as last amended by Laws of Utah 2021, Chapter 337 29 30 Be it enacted by the Legislature of the state of Utah: 31 Section 1. Section 58-67-102 is amended to read: 32 58-67-102. Definitions. 33 In addition to the definitions in Section 58-1-102 , as used in this chapter: 34 (1) (a) " Ablative procedure" means a procedure that is expected to excise, vaporize, 35 disintegrate, or remove living tissue, including the use of carbon dioxide lasers and erbium: 36 YAG lasers. 37 (b) " Ablative procedure" does not include hair removal. 38 (2) "ACGME" means the Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education of the 39 American Medical Association. 40 (3) " Administrative penalty " means a monetary fine or citation imposed by the division 41 for acts or omissions determined to constitute unprofessional or unlawful conduct, in 42 accordance with a fine schedule established by the division in collaboration with the board, as a 43 result of an adjudicative proceeding conducted in accordance with Title 63G, Chapter 4, 44 Administrative Procedures Act. 45 (4) " Associate physician" means an individual licensed under Section 58-67-302.8 . 46 (5) " Attempted sex chang e" means an attempt or effort to chang e an individual' s body 47 to present that individual as being of a sex or gender that is different from the individual' s 48 biolog ical sex at birth. 49 (6) " Biolog ical sex at birth" means an individual' s sex , as being male or female, 50 according to distinct reproductive roles as manifested by : 51 (a) sex and reproductive org an anatomy ; 52 (b) chromosomal makeup; and 53 (c) endog enous hormone profiles. 54 [(5)] (7) "Board" means the physicians L icensing Board created in Section 58-67-201 . 55 [(6)] (8) "Collaborating physician" means an individual licensed under Section 56 58-67-302 who enters into a collaborative practice arrang ement with an associate physician. 57 [(7)] (9) "Collaborative practice arrang ement" means the arrang ement described in 58 Section 58-67-807 .12-16-22 2:09 PM S.B. 1 6 - 3 -59 [(8)] (10) (a) " Cosmetic medical device" means tissue altering energ y based devices 60 that have the potential for altering living tissue and that are used to perform ablative or 61 nonablative procedures, such as American National Standards I nstitute (ANSI ) desig nated 62 Class I IIb and Class I V lasers, intense pulsed lig ht, radio frequency devices, and lipoly tic 63 devices, and ex cludes ANSI desig nated Class I IIa and lower powered devices. 64 (b) Notwithstanding Subsection [ (8)(a)] (10)(a), if an ANSI desig nated Class I IIa and 65 lower powered device is being used to perform an ablative procedure, the device is included in 66 the definition of cosmetic medical device under Subsection [ (8)(a)] (10)(a). 67 [(9)] (11) " Cosmetic medical procedure" : 68 (a) includes the use of cosmetic medical devices to perform ablative or nonablative 69 procedures; and 70 (b) does not include a treatment of the ocular g lobe such as refractive surg ery. 71 [(10)] (12) " Diag nose" means: 72 (a) to ex amine in any manner another person, parts of a person' s body , substances, 73 fluids, or materials ex creted, taken, or removed from a person' s body , or produced by a person' s 74 body , to determine the source, nature, kind, or ex tent of a disease or other phy sical or mental 75 condition; 76 (b) to attempt to conduct an ex amination or determination described under Subsection 77 [(10)(a);] (12)(a); 78 (c) to hold oneself out as making or to represent that one is making an ex amination or 79 determination as described in Subsection [ (10)(a);] (12)(a); or 80 (d) to make an ex amination or determination as described in Subsection [ (10)(a)] 81 (12)(a) upon or from information supplied directly or indirectly by another person, whether or 82 not in the presence of the person making or attempting the diagnosis or ex amination. 83 [(11)] (13) " LCME" means the L iaison Committee on Medical Education of the 84 American Medical Association. 85 [(12)] (14) " Medical assistant" means an unlicensed individual who may perform tasks 86 as described in Subsection 58-67-305 (6). 87 [(13)] (15) " Medically underserved area" means a g eographic area in which there is a 88 shortag e of primary care health services for residents, as determined by the Department of 89 Health and Human Services.S.B. 1 6 12-16-22 2:09 PM - 4 -90 [(14)] (16) " Medically underserved population" means a specified g roup of people 91 living in a defined g eographic area with a shortag e of primary care health services, as 92 determined by the Department of Health and Human Services. 93 [(15)] (17) (a) (i) " Nonablative procedure" means a procedure that is ex pected or 94 intended to alter living tissue, but is not intended or ex pected to ex cise, vaporiz e, disinteg rate, 95 or remove living tissue. 96 (ii) Notwithstanding Subsection [ (15)(a)(i),] (17)(a)(i) nonablative procedure includes 97 hair removal. 98 (b) " Nonablative procedure" does not include: 99 (i) a superficial procedure as defined in Section 58-1-102 ; 100 (ii) the application of permanent make-up; or 101 (iii) the use of photo therapy and lasers for neuromusculoskeletal treatments that are 102 performed by an individual licensed under this title who is acting within the individual' s scope 103 of practice. 104 [(16)] (18) " Physician" means both physicians and surg eons licensed under Section 105 58-67-301 , Utah Medical Practice Act, and osteopathic physicians and surg eons licensed under 106 Section 58-68-301 , Utah Osteopathic Medical Practice Act. 107 [(17)] (19) (a) " Practice of medicine" means: 108 (i) to diag nose, treat, correct, administer anesthesia, or prescribe for any human 109 disease, ailment, injury , infirmity , deformity , pain or other condition, phy sical or mental, real 110 or imag inary , including to perform cosmetic medical procedures, or to attempt to do so, by any 111 means or instrumentality , and by an individual in Utah or outside the state upon or for any 112 human within the state; 113 (ii) when a person not licensed as a physician directs a licensee under this chapter to 114 withhold or alter the health care services that the licensee has ordered; 115 (iii) to maintain an office or place of business for the purpose of doing any of the acts 116 described in Subsection [ (17)(a)] (19)(a)(i) or (ii) whether or not for compensation; or 117 (iv) to use, in the conduct of any occupation or profession pertaining to the diagnosis or 118 treatment of human diseases or conditions in any printed material, stationery , letterhead, 119 envelopes, signs, or advertisements, the designation " doctor," "doctor of medicine," 120 "physician," "surgeon," "physician and surg eon," "Dr.," "M.D.," or any combination of these 12-16-22 2:09 PM S.B. 1 6 - 5 -121 designations in any manner which might cause a reasonable person to believe the individual 122 using the designation is a licensed physician and surgeon, and if the party using the designation 123 is not a licensed physician and surgeon, the designation must additionally contain the 124 description of the branch of the healing arts for which the person has a license, provided that an 125 individual who has received an earned degree of doctor of medicine degree but is not a licensed 126 physician and surgeon in Utah may use the designation " M.D." if it is followed by "Not 127 Licensed" or "Not Licensed in Utah'' in the same size and style of lettering . 128 (b) The practice of medicine does not include: 129 (i) ex cept for an ablative medical procedure as provided in Subsection [ (17)(b)(ii),] 130 (19)(b)(ii) the conduct described in Subsection [ (17)(a)(i)] (19)(a)(i) that is performed in 131 accordance with a license issued under another chapter of this title; 132 (ii) an ablative cosmetic medical procedure if the scope of practice for the person 133 performing the ablative cosmetic medical procedure includes the authority to operate or 134 perform a surgical procedure; or 135 (iii) conduct under Subsection 58-67-501 (2). 136 [(18)] (20) " Prescription device" means an instrument, apparatus, implement, machine, 137 contrivance, implant, in vitro reag ent, or other similar or related article, and any component 138 part or accessory , which is required under federal or state law to be prescribed by a practitioner 139 and dispensed by or throug h a person or entity licensed under this chapter or ex empt from 140 licensure under this chapter. 141 [(19)] (21) " Prescription drug " means a drug that is required by federal or state law or 142 rule to be dispensed only by prescription or is restricted to administration only by practitioners. 143 (22) (a) " Primary sex characteristic surgical procedure" means any of the following if 144 done for the purpose of effectuating or facilitating an individual' s attempted sex change: 145 (i) for an individual whose biological sex at birth is male, castration, orchiectomy , 146 penectomy , vaginoplasty , or vulvoplasty ; 147 (ii) for an individual whose biological sex at birth is female, hysterectomy , 148 oophorectomy , metoidioplasty , or phalloplasty ; or 149 (iii) any surgical procedure that is related to or necessary for a procedure described in 150 Subsection (22)(a)(i) or (ii), that would result in the sterilization of an individual who is not 151 sterile.S.B. 1 6 12-16-22 2:09 PM - 6 -152 (b) " Primary sex characteristic surgical procedure" does not include: 153 (i) surgery or other procedures or treatments performed on an individual who: 154 (A) is born with external biological sex characteristics that are irresolvably ambiguous; 155 (B) is born with 46, XX chromosomes with virilization; 156 (C) is born with 46, XY chromosomes with undervirilization; 157 (D) has both ovarian and testicular tissue; or 158 (E) has been diagnosed by a physician, based on genetic or biochemical testing , with a 159 sex development disorder characterized by abnormal sex chromosome structure, sex steroid 160 hormone production, or sex steroid hormone action for a male or female; or 161 (ii) removing a body part: 162 (A) because the body part is cancerous or diseased; or 163 (B) for a reason that is medically necessary , other than to effectuate or facilitate an 164 individual' s attempted sex chang e. 165 (23) (a) " Secondary sex characteristic surgical procedure" means any of the following 166 if done for the purpose of effectuating or facilitating an individual' s attempted sex change: 167 (i) for an individual whose biological sex at birth is male, breast augmentation surgery, 168 chest feminization surgery, or facial feminization surgery; or 169 (ii) for an individual whose biological sex at birth is female, mastectomy , breast 170 reduction surgery, chest masculinization surgery, or facial masculinization surg ery. 171 (b) " Secondary sex characteristic surgical procedure" does not include: 172 (i) surgery or other procedures or treatments performed on an individual who: 173 (A) is born with external biological sex characteristics that are irresolvably ambiguous; 174 (B) is born with 46, XX chromosomes with virilization; 175 (C) is born with 46, XY chromosomes with undervirilization; 176 (D) has both ovarian and testicular tissue; or 177 (E) has been diagnosed by a physician, based on genetic or biochemical testing , with a 178 sex development disorder characterized by abnormal sex chromosome structure, sex steroid 179 hormone production, or sex steroid hormone action for a male or female; or 180 (ii) removing a body part: 181 (A) because the body part is cancerous or diseased; or 182 (B) for a reason that is medically necessary , other than to effectuate or facilitate an 12-16-22 2:09 PM S.B. 1 6 - 7 -183 individual' s attempted sex chang e. 184 [(20)] (24) " SPEX'' means the Special Purpose Examination of the Federation of State 185 Medical B oards. 186 [(21)] (25) '' Unlawful conduct'' means the same as that term is defined in Sections 187 58-1-501 and 58-67-501 . 188 [(22)] (26) " Unprofessional conduct" means the same as that term is defined in 189 Sections 58-1-501 and 58-67-502 , and as may be further defined by division rule. 190 Section 2. Section 58-67-502 is amended to read: 191 58-67-502. Unprofessional conduct. 192 (1) " Unprofessional conduct" includes, in addition to the definition in Section 193 58-1-501 : 194 (a) using or employing the services of any individual to assist a licensee in any manner 195 not in accordance with the generally recognized practices, standards, or ethics of the 196 profession, state law, or division rule; 197 (b) making a material misrepresentation regarding the qualifications for licensure under 198 Section 58-67-302.7 or [Section] 58-67-302.8 ; 199 (c) violating the dispensing requirements of Chapter 17b, Part 8, Dispensing Medical 200 Practitioner and Dispensing Medical Practitioner Clinic Pharmacy , if applicable; 201 (d) violating the requirements of Title 26, Chapter 61a, Utah Medical Cannabis Act; 202 [or] 203 (e) falsely making an entry in, or altering , a medical record with the intent to conceal: 204 (i) a wrongful or negligent act or omission of an individual licensed under this chapter 205 or an individual under the direction or control of an individual licensed under this chapter; or 206 (ii) conduct described in Subsections (1)(a) through (d) or Subsection 58-1-501 (1)[.]; 207 or 208 (f) performing , or causing to be performed, upon an individual who is less than 18 209 years old: 210 (i) a primary sex characteristic surgical procedure; or 211 (ii) a secondary sex characteristic surgical procedure. 212 (2) " Unprofessional conduct" does not include: 213 (a) in compliance with Section 58-85-103 :S.B. 1 6 12-16-22 2:09 PM - 8 -214 (i) obtaining an investig ational drug or investig ational device; 215 (ii) administering the investig ational drug to an eligible patient; or 216 (iii) treating an eligible patient with the investig ational drug or investig ational device; 217 or 218 (b) in accordance with Title 26, Chapter 61a, Utah Medical Cannabis Act: 219 (i) when registered as a qualified medical provider or acting as a limited medical 220 provider, as those terms are defined in Section 26-61a-102 , recommending the use of medical 221 cannabis; 222 (ii) when registered as a pharmacy medical provider, as that term is defined in Section 223 26-61a-102 , providing pharmacy medical provider services in a medical cannabis pharmacy ; or 224 (iii) when registered as a state central patient portal medical provider, as that term is 225 defined in Section 26-61a-102 , providing state central patient portal medical provider services. 226 (3) Notwithstanding Subsection (2)(b), the division, in consultation with the board and 227 in accordance with Title 63G, Chapter 3, Utah Administrative Rulemaking Act, shall define 228 unprofessional conduct for a physician described in Subsection (2)(b). 229 Section 3. Section 58-68-102 is amended to read: 230 58-68-102. Definitions. 231 In addition to the definitions in Section 58-1-102 , as used in this chapter: 232 (1) (a) " Ablative procedure" means a procedure that is ex pected to ex cise, vaporiz e, 233 disinteg rate, or remove living tissue, including the use of carbon diox ide lasers and erbium: 234 YAG lasers. 235 (b) " Ablative procedure" does not include hair removal. 236 (2) " ACGME" means the Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education of the 237 American Medical Association. 238 (3) " Administrative penalty " means a monetary fine imposed by the division for acts or 239 omissions determined to constitute unprofessional or unlawful conduct, as a result of an 240 adjudicative proceeding conducted in accordance with Title 63G, Chapter 4, Administrative 241 Procedures Act. 242 (4) " AOA" means the American Osteopathic Association. 243 (5) " Associate physician" means an individual licensed under Section 58-68-302.5 . 244 (6) " Attempted sex chang e" means an attempt or effort to chang e an individual' s body12-16-22 2:09 PM S.B. 1 6 - 9 -245 to present that individual as being of a sex or gender that is different from the individual' s 246 biolog ical sex at birth. 247 (7) " Biolog ical sex at birth" means an individual' s sex , as being male or female, 248 according to distinct reproductive roles as manifested by : 249 (a) sex and reproductive org an anatomy ; 250 (b) chromosomal makeup; and 251 (c) endog enous hormone profiles. 252 [(6)] (8) "Board" means the Osteopathic physician and Surg eon's Licensing Board 253 created in Section 58-68-201 . 254 [(7)] (9) "Collaborating physician" means an individual licensed under Section 255 58-68-302 who enters into a collaborative practice arrang ement with an associate physician. 256 [(8)] (10) " Collaborative practice arrang ement" means the arrang ement described in 257 Section 58-68-807 . 258 [(9)] (11) (a) " Cosmetic medical device" means tissue altering energ y based devices 259 that have the potential for altering living tissue and that are used to perform ablative or 260 nonablative procedures, such as American National Standards I nstitute (ANSI ) desig nated 261 Class I IIb and Class I V lasers, intense pulsed lig ht, radio frequency devices, and lipoly tic 262 devices and ex cludes ANSI desig nated Class I IIa and lower powered devices. 263 (b) Notwithstanding Subsection [ (9)(a)] (11)(a), if an ANSI desig nated Class I IIa and 264 lower powered device is being used to perform an ablative procedure, the device is included in 265 the definition of cosmetic medical device under Subsection [ (9)(a)] (11)(a). 266 [(10)] (12) " Cosmetic medical procedure" : 267 (a) includes the use of cosmetic medical devices to perform ablative or nonablative 268 procedures; and 269 (b) does not include a treatment of the ocular g lobe such as refractive surg ery. 270 [(11)] (13) " Diag nose" means: 271 (a) to ex amine in any manner another person, parts of a person' s body , substances, 272 fluids, or materials ex creted, taken, or removed from a person' s body , or produced by a person' s 273 body , to determine the source, nature, kind, or ex tent of a disease or other phy sical or mental 274 condition; 275 (b) to attempt to conduct an ex amination or determination described under SubsectionS.B. 1 6 12-16-22 2:09 PM - 10 -276 [(11)(a)] (13)(a); 277 (c) to hold oneself out as making or to represent that one is making an ex amination or 278 determination as described in Subsection [ (11)(a)] (13)(a); or 279 (d) to make an ex amination or determination as described in Subsection [ (11)(a)] 280 (13)(a) upon or from information supplied directly or indirectly by another person, whether or 281 not in the presence of the person making or attempting the diagnosis or ex amination. 282 [(12)] (14) " Medical assistant" means an unlicensed individual who may perform tasks 283 as described in Subsection 58-68-305 (6). 284 [(13)] (15) " Medically underserved area" means a g eographic area in which there is a 285 shortag e of primary care health services for residents, as determined by the Department of 286 Health and Human Services. 287 [(14)] (16) " Medically underserved population" means a specified g roup of people 288 living in a defined g eographic area with a shortag e of primary care health services, as 289 determined by the Department of Health and Human Services. 290 [(15)] (17) (a) (i) " Nonablative procedure" means a procedure that is ex pected or 291 intended to alter living tissue, but is not ex pected or intended to ex cise, vaporiz e, disinteg rate, 292 or remove living tissue. 293 (ii) Notwithstanding Subsection [ (15)(a)(i)] (17)(a)(i), nonablative procedure includes 294 hair removal. 295 (b) " Nonablative procedure" does not include: 296 (i) a superficial procedure as defined in Section 58-1-102 ; 297 (ii) the application of permanent make-up; or 298 (iii) the use of photo therapy lasers for neuromusculoskeletal treatments that are 299 [preformed] performed by an individual licensed under this title who is acting within the 300 individual' s scope of practice. 301 [(16)] (18) " Physician" means both physicians and surg eons licensed under Section 302 58-67-301 , Utah Medical Practice Act, and osteopathic physicians and surg eons licensed under 303 Section 58-68-301 , Utah Osteopathic Medical Practice Act. 304 [(17)] (19) (a) " Practice of osteopathic medicine" means: 305 (i) to diag nose, treat, correct, administer anesthesia, or prescribe for any human 306 disease, ailment, injury , infirmity , deformity , pain, or other condition, phy sical or mental, real12-16-22 2:09 PM S.B. 1 6 - 11 -307 or imag inary , or to attempt to do so, by any means or instrumentality , which in whole or in part 308 is based upon emphasis of the importance of the musculoskeletal sy stem and manipulative 309 therapy in the maintenance and restoration of health, by an individual in Utah or outside of the 310 state upon or for any human within the state; 311 (ii) when a person not licensed as a physician directs a licensee under this chapter to 312 withhold or alter the health care services that the licensee has ordered; 313 (iii) to maintain an office or place of business for the purpose of doing any of the acts 314 described in Subsection [ (17)(a)] (19)(a)(i) or (ii) whether or not for compensation; or 315 (iv) to use, in the conduct of any occupation or profession pertaining to the diagnosis or 316 treatment of human diseases or conditions, in any printed material, stationery , letterhead, 317 envelopes, sig ns, or advertisements, the designation " doctor," "doctor of osteopathic medicine," 318 "osteopathic physician," "osteopathic surg eon," "osteopathic physician and surg eon," "Dr.," 319 "D.O.," or any combination of these designations in any manner which might cause a 320 reasonable person to believe the individual using the designation is a licensed osteopathic 321 physician, and if the party using the designation is not a licensed osteopathic physician, the 322 designation must additionally contain the description of the branch of the healing arts for which 323 the person has a license, provided that an individual who has received an earned degree of 324 doctor of osteopathic medicine but is not a licensed osteopathic physician and surgeon in Utah 325 may use the designation " D.O." if it is followed by "Not Licensed" or "Not Licensed in Utah" 326 in the same size and style of lettering . 327 (b) The practice of osteopathic medicine does not include: 328 (i) except for an ablative medical procedure as provided in Subsection [ (17)(b)(ii)] 329 (19)(b)(ii), the conduct described in Subsection [ (17)(a)(i)] (19)(a)(i) that is performed in 330 accordance with a license issued under another chapter of this title; 331 (ii) an ablative cosmetic medical procedure if the scope of practice for the person 332 performing the ablative cosmetic medical procedure includes the authority to operate or 333 perform a surgical procedure; or 334 (iii) conduct under Subsection 58-68-501 (2). 335 [(18)] (20) " Prescription device" means an instrument, apparatus, implement, machine, 336 contrivance, implant, in vitro reagent, or other similar or related article, and any component 337 part or accessory , which is required under federal or state law to be prescribed by a practitionerS.B. 1 6 12-16-22 2:09 PM - 12 -338 and dispensed by or through a person or entity licensed under this chapter or exempt from 339 licensure under this chapter. 340 [(19)] (21) " Prescription drug " means a drug that is required by federal or state law or 341 rule to be dispensed only by prescription or is restricted to administration only by practitioners. 342 (22) (a) " Primary sex characteristic surgical procedure" means any of the following if 343 done for the purpose of effectuating or facilitating an individual' s attempted sex change: 344 (i) for an individual whose biological sex at birth is male, castration, orchiectomy , 345 penectomy , vaginoplasty , or vulvoplasty ; 346 (ii) for an individual whose biological sex at birth is female, hysterectomy , 347 oophorectomy , metoidioplasty , or phalloplasty ; or 348 (iii) any surgical procedure that is related to or necessary for a procedure described in 349 Subsection (22)(a)(i) or (ii), that would result in the sterilization of an individual who is not 350 sterile. 351 (b) " Primary sex characteristic surgical procedure" does not include: 352 (i) surgery or other procedures or treatments performed on an individual who: 353 (A) is born with external biological sex characteristics that are irresolvably ambiguous; 354 (B) is born with 46, XX chromosomes with virilization; 355 (C) is born with 46, XY chromosomes with undervirilization; 356 (D) has both ovarian and testicular tissue; or 357 (E) has been diagnosed by a physician, based on genetic or biochemical testing , with a 358 sex development disorder characterized by abnormal sex chromosome structure, sex steroid 359 hormone production, or sex steroid hormone action for a male or female; or 360 (ii) removing a body part: 361 (A) because the body part is cancerous or diseased; or 362 (B) for a reason that is medically necessary , other than to effectuate or facilitate an 363 individual' s attempted sex chang e. 364 (23) (a) " Secondary sex characteristic surgical procedure'' means any of the following 365 if done for the purpose of effectuating or facilitating an individual' s attempted sex change: 366 (i) for an individual whose biological sex at birth is male, breast augmentation surgery, 367 chest feminization surgery, or facial feminization surgery; or 368 (ii) for an individual whose biological sex at birth is female, mastectomy , breast 12-16-22 2:09 PM S.B. 1 6 - 13 -369 reduction surgery, chest masculinization surgery, or facial masculinization surg ery. 370 (b) " Secondary sex characteristic surgical procedure" does not include: 371 (i) surgery or other procedures or treatments performed on an individual who: 372 (A) is born with ex ternal biological sex characteristics that are irresolvably ambiguous; 373 (B) is born with 46, XX chromosomes with virilization; 374 (C) is born with 46, XY chromosomes with undervirilization; 375 (D) has both ovarian and testicular tissue; or 376 (E) has been diagnosed by a physician, based on genetic or biochemical testing , with a 377 sex development disorder characterized by abnormal sex chromosome structure, sex steroid 378 hormone production, or sex steroid hormone action for a male or female; or 379 (ii) removing a body part: 380 (A) because the body part is cancerous or diseased; or 381 (B) for a reason that is medically necessary , other than to effectuate or facilitate an 382 individual' s attempted sex chang e. 383 [(20)] (24) " SPEX'' means the Special Purpose Examination of the Federation of State 384 Medical B oards. 385 [(21)] (25) '' Unlawful conduct'' means the same as that term is defined in Sections 386 58-1-501 and 58-68-501 . 387 [(22)] (26) " Unprofessional conduct" means the same as that term is defined in 388 Sections 58-1-501 and 58-68-502 and as may be further defined by division rule. 389 Section 4. Section 58-68-502 is amended to read: 390 58-68-502. Unprofessional conduct. 391 (1) " Unprofessional conduct" includes, in addition to the definition in Section 392 58-1-501 : 393 (a) using or employing the services of any individual to assist a licensee in any manner 394 not in accordance with the generally recognized practices, standards, or ethics of the 395 profession, state law, or division rule; 396 (b) violating the dispensing requirements of Chapter 17b, Part 8, Dispensing Medical 397 Practitioner and Dispensing Medical Practitioner Clinic Pharmacy , if applicable; 398 (c) making a material misrepresentation regarding the qualifications for licensure under 399 Section 58-68-302.5 ;S.B. 1 6 12-16-22 2:09 PM - 14 -400 (d) violating the requirements of Title 26, Chapter 61a, Utah Medical Cannabis Act; 401 [or] 402 (e) falsely making an entry in, or altering , a medical record with the intent to conceal: 403 (i) a wrongful or negligent act or omission of an individual licensed under this chapter 404 or an individual under the direction or control of an individual licensed under this chapter; or 405 (ii) conduct described in Subsections (1)(a) through (d) or Subsection 58-1-501 (1)[.]; 406 or 407 (f) performing , or causing to be performed, upon an individual who is less than 18 408 years old: 409 (i) a primary sex characteristic surgical procedure; or 410 (ii) a secondary sex characteristic surgical procedure. 411 (2) " Unprofessional conduct" does not include: 412 (a) in compliance with Section 58-85-103 : 413 (i) obtaining an investig ational drug or investig ational device; 414 (ii) administering the investig ational drug to an eligible patient; or 415 (iii) treating an eligible patient with the investig ational drug or investig ational device; 416 or 417 (b) in accordance with Title 26, Chapter 61a, Utah Medical Cannabis Act: 418 (i) when registered as a qualified medical provider or acting as a limited medical 419 provider, as those terms are defined in Section 26-61a-102 , recommending the use of medical 420 cannabis; 421 (ii) when registered as a pharmacy medical provider, as that term is defined in Section 422 26-61a-102 , providing pharmacy medical provider services in a medical cannabis pharmacy ; or 423 (iii) when registered as a state central patient portal medical provider, as that term is 424 defined in Section 26-61a-102 , providing state central patient portal medical provider services. 425 (3) Notwithstanding Subsection (2)(b), the division, in consultation with the board and 426 in accordance with Title 63G, Chapter 3, Utah Administrative Rulemaking Act, shall define 427 unprofessional conduct for a physician described in Subsection (2)(b).H.B. 132 LEGISLATIVE GENERAL COUNSEL 6 Approved for Filing: C. Williams 6 6 12-29-22 9:14 AM 6H.B. 1 32 1 PROHIBITING SEX TRANSITIONING PROCEDURES ON 2 MINORS 3 2023 GENERAL SESSION 4 STATE OF UTAH 5 Chief Sponsor: Rex P. Shi pp 6 Senate Sponsor: ____________ 7 8 LONG TITLE 9 General Description: 10 This bill prohibits a health care provider from performing a medical procedure on a 11 minor for the purpose of attempted sex transitioning or attempted sex chang e. 12 Highlighted Provisions: 13 This bill: 14 <defines terms; 15 <makes it unprofessional conduct for a health care provider to perform a medical 16 procedure on a minor for the purpose of attempted sex transitioning or attempted 17 sex change; and 18 <makes technical chang es. 19 Money Appropriated in this Bill: 20 None 21 Other Special Clauses: 22 None 23 Utah Code Sections Affected: 24 AMENDS: 25 58-31b-502 , as last amended by Laws of Utah 2022, Chapter 290 26 58-67-102 , as last amended by Laws of Utah 2022, Chapter 233 27 58-67-502 , as last amended by Laws of Utah 2021, Chapter 337 *HB0132*H.B. 1 32 12-29-22 9:14 AM - 2 -28 58-68-102 , as last amended by Laws of Utah 2022, Chapter 233 29 58-68-502 , as last amended by Laws of Utah 2021, Chapter 337 30 58-70a-503 , as last amended by Laws of Utah 2022, Chapter 290 31 ENACTS: 32 58-1-511 , Utah Code Annotated 1953 33 34 Be it enacted by the Legislature of the state of Utah: 35 Section 1. Section 58-1-511 is enacted to read: 36 58-1-511. Prohibition on horm onal transgender procedures on m inors. 37 (1) As used in this section: 38 (a) " Administration of cross-sex hormones" means administering or supply ing: 39 (i) to an individual whose biolog ical sex at birth is female, a dose of testosterone or 40 other androg ens at levels above those normally found in an individual whose biolog ical sex at 41 birth is female; or 42 (ii) to an individual whose biolog ical sex at birth is male, a dose of estrog en or a 43 synthetic compound with estrog enic activity or effect at levels above those normally found in 44 an individual whose biolog ical sex at birth is male. 45 (b) " Health care provider" means: 46 (i) a physician licensed under: 47 (A) Chapter 67, Utah Medical Practice Act; or 48 (B) Chapter 68, Utah Osteopathic Medical Practice Act; 49 (ii) a physician assistant licensed under Chapter 70a, Utah physician Assistant Act; or 50 (iii) an advanced practice reg istered nurse licensed under Subsection 58-31b-301 (2)(e). 51 (c) " Hormonal transgender procedure" means: 52 (i) administration of cross-sex hormones; or 53 (ii) performing a puberty inhibition procedure. 54 (d) " Minor" means an individual who: 55 (i) is less than 18 y ears old; and 56 (ii) is not emancipated under Title 80, Chapter 7, Emancipation. 57 (e) (i) " Puberty inhibition procedure" means administering or supply ing, alone or in 58 combination with aromatase inhibitors:12-29-22 9:14 AM H.B. 1 32 - 3 -59 (A) g onadotropin-releasing hormone ag onists; 60 (B) prog estins; or 61 (C) androg en receptor inhibitors. 62 (ii) " Puberty inhibition procedure" does not include administering or supply ing a 63 treatment described in Subsection (1)(e)(i) to an individual if the treatment is medically 64 necessary as a treatment for: 65 (A) precocious puberty ; 66 (B) idiopathic short stature; 67 (C) endometriosis; or 68 (D) a sex hormone-stimulated cancer. 69 (2) A health care provider may not perform a hormonal transgender procedure on a 70 minor. 71 Section 2. Section 58-31b-502 is amended to read: 72 58-31b-502. Unprofessional conduct. 73 (1) " Unprofessional conduct" includes: 74 (a) failure to safeg uard a patient' s right to privacy as to the patient' s person, condition, 75 diagnosis, personal effects, or any other matter about which the licensee is privileg ed to know 76 because of the licensee' s or person with a certification' s position or practice as a nurse or 77 practice as a medication aide certified; 78 (b) failure to provide nursing service or service as a medication aide certified in a 79 manner that demonstrates respect for the patient' s human dig nity and unique personal character 80 and needs without reg ard to the patient' s race, relig ion, ethnic backg round, socioeconomic 81 status, ag e, sex , or the nature of the patient' s health problem; 82 (c) eng aging in sex ual relations with a patient during any: 83 (i) period when a g enerally recog nized professional relationship ex ists between the 84 person licensed or certified under this chapter and the patient; or 85 (ii) ex tended period when a patient has reasonable cause to believe a professional 86 relationship ex ists between the person licensed or certified under the provisions of this chapter 87 and the patient; 88 (d) (i) as a result of any circumstance under Subsection (1)(c), ex ploiting or using 89 information about a patient or ex ploiting the licensee' s or the person with a certification' sH.B. 1 32 12-29-22 9:14 AM - 4 -90 professional relationship between the licensee or holder of a certification under this chapter and 91 the patient; or 92 (ii) ex ploiting the patient by use of the licensee' s or person with a certification' s 93 knowledg e of the patient obtained while acting as a nurse or a medication aide certified; 94 (e) unlawfully obtaining , possessing , or using any prescription drug or illicit drug ; 95 (f) unauthoriz ed taking or personal use of nursing supplies from an employ er; 96 (g) unauthoriz ed taking or personal use of a patient' s personal property ; 97 (h) unlawful or inappropriate deleg ation of nursing care; 98 (i) failure to ex ercise appropriate supervision of persons providing patient care services 99 under supervision of the licensed nurse; 100 (j) employ ing or aiding and abetting the employ ment of an unqualified or unlicensed 101 person to practice as a nurse; 102 (k) failure to file or record any medical report as required by law, impeding or 103 obstructing the filing or recording of such a report, or inducing another to fail to file or record 104 such a report; 105 (l) breach of a statutory , common law, reg ulatory , or ethical requirement of 106 confidentiality with respect to a person who is a patient, unless ordered by a court; 107 (m) failure to pay a penalty imposed by the division; 108 (n) prescribing a Schedule I I controlled substance without comply ing with the 109 requirements in Section 58-31b-803 , if applicable; 110 (o) violating Section 58-31b-801 ; 111 (p) violating the dispensing requirements of Section 58-17b-309 or Chapter 17b, Part 112 8, Dispensing Medical Practitioner and Dispensing Medical Practitioner Clinic Pharmacy , if 113 applicable; 114 (q) falsely making an entry in, or altering , a medical record with the intent to conceal: 115 (i) a wrong ful or neg ligent act or omission of an individual licensed under this chapter 116 or an individual under the direction or control of an individual licensed under this chapter; or 117 (ii) conduct described in Subsections (1)(a) throug h (o) or Subsection 58-1-501 (1); [ or] 118 (r) violating the requirements of Title 26, Chapter 61a, Utah Medical Cannabis Act[ .]; 119 or 120 (s) performing , or causing to be performed, a hormonal transgender procedure on 12-29-22 9:14 AM H.B. 1 32 - 5 -121 violation of Section 58-1-511 . 122 (2) " Unprofessional conduct" does not include, in accordance with Title 26, Chapter 123 61a, Utah Medical Cannabis Act, when registered as a qualified medical provider, or acting as 124 a limited medical provider, as those terms are defined in Section 26-61a-102 , recommending 125 the use of medical cannabis. 126 (3) Notwithstanding Subsection (2), the division, in consultation with the board and in 127 accordance with Title 63G, Chapter 3, Utah Administrative Rulemaking Act, shall define 128 unprofessional conduct for an advanced practice registered nurse described in Subsection (2). 129 Section 3. Section 58-67-102 is amended to read: 130 58-67-102. Definitions. 131 In addition to the definitions in Section 58-1-102 , as used in this chapter: 132 (1) (a) " Ablative procedure" means a procedure that is ex pected to ex cise, vaporiz e, 133 disinteg rate, or remove living tissue, including the use of carbon diox ide lasers and erbium: 134 YAG lasers. 135 (b) " Ablative procedure" does not include hair removal. 136 (2) " ACGME" means the Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education of the 137 American Medical Association. 138 (3) " Administrative penalty " means a monetary fine or citation imposed by the division 139 for acts or omissions determined to constitute unprofessional or unlawful conduct, in 140 accordance with a fine schedule established by the division in collaboration with the board, as a 141 result of an adjudicative proceeding conducted in accordance with Title 63G, Chapter 4, 142 Administrative Procedures Act. 143 (4) " Associate physician" means an individual licensed under Section 58-67-302.8 . 144 (5) " Attempted sex chang e" means an attempt or effort to chang e an individual' s body 145 to present that individual as being of a sex or gender that is different from the individual' s 146 biolog ical sex at birth. 147 (6) " Biolog ical sex at birth" means an individual' s sex , as being male or female, 148 according to distinct reproductive roles as manifested by sex and reproductive org an anatomy , 149 chromosomal makeup, and endog enous hormone profiles. 150 [(5)] (7) "Board" means the physicians L icensing Board created in Section 58-67-201 . 151 [(6)] (8) "Collaborating physician" means an individual licensed under SectionH.B. 1 32 12-29-22 9:14 AM - 6 -152 58-67-302 who enters into a collaborative practice arrang ement with an associate physician. 153 [(7)] (9) "Collaborative practice arrang ement" means the arrang ement described in 154 Section 58-67-807 . 155 (10) " Cosmetic breast surgical procedure" means a breast reduction surg ery or a breast 156 augmentation surg ery that is performed for a purpose other than: 157 (a) medical necessity ; or 158 (b) to address a musculoskeletal problem. 159 [(8)] (11) (a) " Cosmetic medical device" means tissue altering energ y based devices 160 that have the potential for altering living tissue and that are used to perform ablative or 161 nonablative procedures, such as American National Standards I nstitute (ANSI ) desig nated 162 Class I IIb and Class I V lasers, intense pulsed lig ht, radio frequency devices, and lipoly tic 163 devices, and ex cludes ANSI desig nated Class I IIa and lower powered devices. 164 (b) Notwithstanding Subsection [ (8)(a),] (11)(a), if an ANSI desig nated Class I IIa and 165 lower powered device is being used to perform an ablative procedure, the device is included in 166 the definition of cosmetic medical device under Subsection [ (8)(a).] (11)(a). 167 [(9)] (12) " Cosmetic medical procedure" : 168 (a) includes the use of cosmetic medical devices to perform ablative or nonablative 169 procedures; and 170 (b) does not include a treatment of the ocular g lobe such as refractive surg ery. 171 [(10)] (13) " Diag nose" means: 172 (a) to ex amine in any manner another person, parts of a person' s body , substances, 173 fluids, or materials ex creted, taken, or removed from a person' s body , or produced by a person' s 174 body , to determine the source, nature, kind, or ex tent of a disease or other phy sical or mental 175 condition; 176 (b) to attempt to conduct an ex amination or determination described under Subsection 177 [(10)(a);] (13)(a); 178 (c) to hold oneself out as making or to represent that one is making an ex amination or 179 determination as described in Subsection [ (10)(a);] (13)(a); or 180 (d) to make an ex amination or determination as described in Subsection [ (10)(a)] 181 (13)(a) upon or from information supplied directly or indirectly by another person, whether or 182 not in the presence of the person making or attempting the diagnosis or ex amination.12-29-22 9:14 AM H.B. 1 32 - 7 -183 [(11)] (14) " LCME" means the L iaison Committee on Medical Education of the 184 American Medical Association. 185 [(12)] (15) " Medical assistant" means an unlicensed individual who may perform tasks 186 as described in Subsection 58-67-305 (6). 187 [(13)] (16) " Medically underserved area" means a g eographic area in which there is a 188 shortag e of primary care health services for residents, as determined by the Department of 189 Health. 190 [(14)] (17) " Medically underserved population" means a specified g roup of people 191 living in a defined g eographic area with a shortag e of primary care health services, as 192 determined by the Department of Health. 193 [(15)] (18) (a) (i) " Nonablative procedure" means a procedure that is ex pected or 194 intended to alter living tissue, but is not intended or ex pected to ex cise, vaporiz e, disinteg rate, 195 or remove living tissue. 196 (ii) Notwithstanding Subsection [ (15)(a)(i)] (18)(a)(i), nonablative procedure includes 197 hair removal. 198 (b) " Nonablative procedure" does not include: 199 (i) a superficial procedure as defined in Section 58-1-102 ; 200 (ii) the application of permanent make-up; or 201 (iii) the use of photo therapy and lasers for neuromusculoskeletal treatments that are 202 performed by an individual licensed under this title who is acting within the individual' s scope 203 of practice. 204 [(16)] (19) " Physician" means both physicians and surg eons licensed under Section 205 58-67-301 , Utah Medical Practice Act, and osteopathic physicians and surgeons licensed under 206 Section 58-68-301 , Utah Osteopathic Medical Practice Act. 207 [(17)] (20) (a) " Practice of medicine" means: 208 (i) to diag nose, treat, correct, administer anesthesia, or prescribe for any human 209 disease, ailment, injury , infirmity , deformity , pain or other condition, phy sical or mental, real 210 or imag inary , including to perform cosmetic medical procedures, or to attempt to do so, by any 211 means or instrumentality , and by an individual in Utah or outside the state upon or for any 212 human within the state; 213 (ii) when a person not licensed as a physician directs a licensee under this chapter toH.B. 1 32 12-29-22 9:14 AM - 8 -214 withhold or alter the health care services that the licensee has ordered; 215 (iii) to maintain an office or place of business for the purpose of doing any of the acts 216 described in Subsection [ (17)(a)] (20)(a) whether or not for compensation; or 217 (iv) to use, in the conduct of any occupation or profession pertaining to the diagnosis or 218 treatment of human diseases or conditions in any printed material, stationery , letterhead, 219 envelopes, sig ns, or advertisements, the designation " doctor," "doctor of medicine," 220 "physician," "surgeon," "physician and surg eon," "Dr.," "M.D.," or any combination of these 221 designations in any manner which might cause a reasonable person to believe the individual 222 using the designation is a licensed physician and surgeon, and if the party using the designation 223 is not a licensed physician and surgeon, the designation must additionally contain the 224 description of the branch of the healing arts for which the person has a license, provided that an 225 individual who has received an earned degree of doctor of medicine degree but is not a licensed 226 physician and surgeon in Utah may use the designation " M.D." if it is followed by "Not 227 Licensed" or "Not Licensed in Utah'' in the same size and style of lettering . 228 (b) The practice of medicine does not include: 229 (i) except for an ablative medical procedure as provided in Subsection [ (17)(b)(ii)] 230 (20)(b)(ii), the conduct described in Subsection [ (17)(a)(i)] (20)(a)(i)that is performed in 231 accordance with a license issued under another chapter of this title; 232 (ii) an ablative cosmetic medical procedure if the scope of practice for the person 233 performing the ablative cosmetic medical procedure includes the authority to operate or 234 perform a surgical procedure; or 235 (iii) conduct under Subsection 58-67-501 (2). 236 [(18)] (21) " Prescription device" means an instrument, apparatus, implement, machine, 237 contrivance, implant, in vitro reagent, or other similar or related article, and any component 238 part or accessory , which is required under federal or state law to be prescribed by a practitioner 239 and dispensed by or through a person or entity licensed under this chapter or exempt from 240 licensure under this chapter. 241 [(19)] (22) " Prescription drug " means a drug that is required by federal or state law or 242 rule to be dispensed only by prescription or is restricted to administration only by practitioners. 243 (23) (a) " Sex characteristic-altering surgical procedure" means, for the purpose of 244 effectuating or facilitating an individual' s attempted sex chang e:12-29-22 9:14 AM H.B. 1 32 - 9 -245 (i) castration, orchiectomy , penectomy , vaginoplasty , vulvoplasty , breast aug mentation 246 surgery, or facial feminization surg ery on an individual whose biolog ical sex at birth is male; 247 (ii) mastectomy , hysterectomy , oophorectomy , metoidioplasty , phalloplasty , or chest or 248 facial masculiniz ation procedures on an individual whose biolog ical sex at birth is female; 249 (iii) any surgical procedure that is related to or necessary for a procedure described in 250 Subsection (23)(a)(i) or (ii), that would result in the steriliz ation of an individual who is 251 non-sterile; or 252 (iv) removing any otherwise healthy or non-diseased body part or tissue. 253 (b) " Sex characteristic-altering surgical procedure" does not include: 254 (i) surg ery or other procedures or treatments performed on an individual who: 255 (A) is born with ex ternal biolog ical sex characteristics that are irresolvably ambig uous; 256 (B) is born with 46, XX chromosomes with viriliz ation; 257 (C) is born with 46, XY chromosomes with underviriliz ation; 258 (D) has both ovarian and testicular tissue; or 259 (E) has been diagnosed by a physician, based on genetic or biochemical testing , with a 260 sex development disorder characterized by abnormal sex chromosome structure, sex steroid 261 hormone production, or sex steroid hormone action for a male or female; or 262 (ii) removing a body part: 263 (A) because the body part is cancerous or diseased; or 264 (B) for a reason that is medically necessary , other than to effectuate or facilitate an 265 individual' s attempted sex chang e. 266 [(20)] (24) " SPEX'' means the Special Purpose Examination of the Federation of State 267 Medical B oards. 268 [(21)] (25) " Unlawful conduct'' means the same as that term is defined in Sections 269 58-1-501 and 58-67-501 . 270 [(22)] (26) " Unprofessional conduct" means the same as That the The term is defined in 271 Sections 58-1-501 and 58-67-502 , and as may be further defined by division rule. 272 Section 4. Section 58-67-502 is amended to read: 273 58-67-502. Unprofessional conduct. 274 (1) " Unprofessional conduct" includes, in addition to the definition in Section 275 58-1-501 :H.B. 1 32 12-29-22 9:14 AM - 10 -276 (a) using or employing the services of any individual to assist a licensee in any manner 277 not in accordance with the generally recognized practices, standards, or ethics of the 278 profession, state law, or division rule; 279 (b) making a material misrepresentation regarding the qualifications for licensure under 280 Section 58-67-302.7 or Section 58-67-302.8 ; 281 (c) violating the dispensing requirements of Chapter 17b, Part 8, Dispensing Medical 282 Practitioner and Dispensing Medical Practitioner Clinic Pharmacy , if applicable; 283 (d) violating the requirements of Title 26, Chapter 61a, Utah Medical Cannabis Act; 284 [or] 285 (e) falsely making an entry in, or altering , a medical record with the intent to conceal: 286 (i) a wrongful or negligent act or omission of an individual licensed under this chapter 287 or an individual under the direction or control of an individual licensed under this chapter; or 288 (ii) conduct described in Subsections (1)(a) through (d) or Subsection 58-1-501 (1)[.]; 289 or 290 (f) performing , or causing to be performed, upon a minor as defined in Section 291 58-1-603 : 292 (i) a hormonal transgender procedure in violation of Section 58-1-511 ; 293 (ii) a sex characteristic-altering surgical procedure; or 294 (iii) a cosmetic breast surgical procedure. 295 (2) " Unprofessional conduct" does not include: 296 (a) in compliance with Section 58-85-103 : 297 (i) obtaining an investig ational drug or investig ational device; 298 (ii) administering the investig ational drug to an eligible patient; or 299 (iii) treating an eligible patient with the investig ational drug or investig ational device; 300 or 301 (b) in accordance with Title 26, Chapter 61a, Utah Medical Cannabis Act: 302 (i) when registered as a qualified medical provider or acting as a limited medical 303 provider, as those terms are defined in Section 26-61a-102 , recommending the use of medical 304 cannabis; 305 (ii) when registered as a pharmacy medical provider, as that term is defined in Section 306 26-61a-102 , providing pharmacy medical provider services in a medical cannabis pharmacy ; or12-29-22 9:14 AM H.B. 1 32 - 11 -307 (iii) when registered as a state central patient portal medical provider, as that term is 308 defined in Section 26-61a-102 , providing state central patient portal medical provider services. 309 (3) Notwithstanding Subsection (2)(b), the division, in consultation with the board and 310 in accordance with Title 63G, Chapter 3, Utah Administrative Rulemaking Act, shall define 311 unprofessional conduct for a physician described in Subsection (2)(b). 312 Section 5. Section 58-68-102 is amended to read: 313 58-68-102. Definitions. 314 In addition to the definitions in Section 58-1-102 , as used in this chapter: 315 (1) (a) " Ablative procedure" means a procedure that is ex pected to ex cise, vaporiz e, 316 disinteg rate, or remove living tissue, including the use of carbon diox ide lasers and erbium: 317 YAG lasers. 318 (b) " Ablative procedure" does not include hair removal. 319 (2) " ACGME" means the Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education of the 320 American Medical Association. 321 (3) " Administrative penalty " means a monetary fine imposed by the division for acts or 322 omissions determined to constitute unprofessional or unlawful conduct, as a result of an 323 adjudicative proceeding conducted in accordance with Title 63G, Chapter 4, Administrative 324 Procedures Act. 325 (4) " AOA" means the American Osteopathic Association. 326 (5) " Associate physician" means an individual licensed under Section 58-68-302.5 . 327 (6) " Attempted sex chang e" means an attempt or effort to chang e an individual' s body 328 to present that individual as being of a sex or gender that is different from the individual' s 329 biolog ical sex at birth. 330 (7) " Biolog ical sex at birth" means an individual' s sex , as being male or female, 331 according to distinct reproductive roles as manifested by sex and reproductive org an anatomy , 332 chromosomal makeup, and endog enous hormone profiles. 333 [(6)] (8) "Board" means the Osteopathic physician and Surg eon's Licensing Board 334 created in Section 58-68-201 . 335 [(7)] (9) "Collaborating physician" means an individual licensed under Section 336 58-68-302 who enters into a collaborative practice arrang ement with an associate physician. 337 [(8)] (10) " Collaborative practice arrang ement" means the arrang ement described inH.B. 1 32 12-29-22 9:14 AM - 12 -338 Section 58-68-807 . 339 (11) " Cosmetic breast surgical procedure" means a breast reduction surg ery or a breast 340 augmentation surg ery for reasons other than: 341 (a) medical necessity ; or 342 (b) to address a musculoskeletal problem. 343 [(9)] (12) (a) " Cosmetic medical device" means tissue altering energ y based devices 344 that have the potential for altering living tissue and that are used to perform ablative or 345 nonablative procedures, such as American National Standards I nstitute (ANSI ) desig nated 346 Class I IIb and Class I V lasers, intense pulsed lig ht, radio frequency devices, and lipolytic 347 devices and excludes ANSI desig nated Class I IIa and lower powered devices. 348 (b) Notwithstanding Subsection [ (9)(a)] (12)(a), if an ANSI desig nated Class I IIa and 349 lower powered device is being used to perform an ablative procedure, the device is included in 350 the definition of cosmetic medical device under Subsection [ (9)(a)] (12)(a). 351 [(10)] (13) " Cosmetic medical procedure" : 352 (a) includes the use of cosmetic medical devices to perform ablative or nonablative 353 procedures; and 354 (b) does not include a treatment of the ocular g lobe such as refractive surg ery. 355 [(11)] (14) " Diag nose" means: 356 (a) to ex amine in any manner another person, parts of a person' s body , substances, 357 fluids, or materials ex creted, taken, or removed from a person' s body , or produced by a person' s 358 body , to determine the source, nature, kind, or ex tent of a disease or other phy sical or mental 359 condition; 360 (b) to attempt to conduct an ex amination or determination described under Subsection 361 [(11)(a)] (14)(a); 362 (c) to hold oneself out as making or to represent that one is making an ex amination or 363 determination as described in Subsection [ (11)(a)] (14)(a); or 364 (d) to make an ex amination or determination as described in Subsection [ (11)(a)] 365 (14)(a) upon or from information supplied directly or indirectly by another person, whether or 366 not in the presence of the person making or attempting the diagnosis or ex amination. 367 [(12)] (15) " Medical assistant" means an unlicensed individual who may perform tasks 368 as described in Subsection 58-68-305 (6).12-29-22 9:14 AM H.B. 1 32 - 13 -369 [(13)] (16) " Medically underserved area" means a g eographic area in which there is a 370 shortag e of primary care health services for residents, as determined by the Department of 371 Health. 372 [(14)] (17) " Medically underserved population" means a specified g roup of people 373 living in a defined g eographic area with a shortag e of primary care health services, as 374 determined by the Department of Health. 375 [(15)] (18) (a) (i) " Nonablative procedure" means a procedure that is ex pected or 376 intended to alter living tissue, but is not ex pected or intended to ex cise, vaporiz e, disinteg rate, 377 or remove living tissue. 378 (ii) Notwithstanding Subsection [ (15)(a)(i)] (18)(a)(i), nonablative procedure includes 379 hair removal. 380 (b) " Nonablative procedure" does not include: 381 (i) a superficial procedure as defined in Section 58-1-102 ; 382 (ii) the application of permanent make-up; or 383 (iii) the use of photo therapy lasers for neuromusculoskeletal treatments that are 384 preformed by an individual licensed under this title who is acting within the individual' s scope 385 of practice. 386 [(16)] (19) " Physician" means both physicians and surg eons licensed under Section 387 58-67-301 , Utah Medical Practice Act, and osteopathic physicians and surg eons licensed under 388 Section 58-68-301 , Utah Osteopathic Medical Practice Act. 389 [(17)] (20) (a) " Practice of osteopathic medicine" means: 390 (i) to diag nose, treat, correct, administer anesthesia, or prescribe for any human 391 disease, ailment, injury , infirmity , deformity , pain, or other condition, phy sical or mental, real 392 or imag inary , or to attempt to do so, by any means or instrumentality , which in whole or in part 393 is based upon emphasis of the importance of the musculoskeletal sy stem and manipulative 394 therapy in the maintenance and restoration of health, by an individual in Utah or outside of the 395 state upon or for any human within the state; 396 (ii) when a person not licensed as a physician directs a licensee under this chapter to 397 withhold or alter the health care services that the licensee has ordered; 398 (iii) to maintain an office or place of business for the purpose of doing any of the acts 399 described in Subsection [ (17)(a)] (20)(a) whether or not for compensation; orH.B. 1 32 12-29-22 9:14 AM - 14 -400 (iv) to use, in the conduct of any occupation or profession pertaining to the diagnosis or 401 treatment of human diseases or conditions, in any printed material, stationery , letterhead, 402 envelopes, sig ns, or advertisements, the designation " doctor," "doctor of osteopathic medicine," 403 "osteopathic physician," "osteopathic surg eon," "osteopathic physician and surg eon," "Dr.," 404 "D.O.," or any combination of these designations in any manner which might cause a 405 reasonable person to believe the individual using the designation is a licensed osteopathic 406 physician, and if the party using the designation is not a licensed osteopathic physician, the 407 designation must additionally contain the description of the branch of the healing arts for which 408 the person has a license, provided that an individual who has received an earned degree of 409 doctor of osteopathic medicine but is not a licensed osteopathic physician and surgeon in Utah 410 may use the designation " D.O." if it is followed by "Not Licensed" or "Not Licensed in Utah'' 411 in the same size and style of lettering . 412 (b) The practice of osteopathic medicine does not include: 413 (i) except for an ablative medical procedure as provided in Subsection [ (17)(b)(ii)] 414 (20)(b)(ii), the conduct described in Subsection [ (17)(a)(i)] (20)(a)(i) that is performed in 415 accordance with a license issued under another chapter of this title; 416 (ii) an ablative cosmetic medical procedure if the scope of practice for the person 417 performing the ablative cosmetic medical procedure includes the authority to operate or 418 perform a surgical procedure; or 419 (iii) conduct under Subsection 58-68-501 (2). 420 [(18)] (21) " Prescription device" means an instrument, apparatus, implement, machine, 421 contrivance, implant, in vitro reagent, or other similar or related article, and any component 422 part or accessory , which is required under federal or state law to be prescribed by a practitioner 423 and dispensed by or through a person or entity licensed under this chapter or exempt from 424 licensure under this chapter. 425 [(19)] (22) " Prescription drug " means a drug that is required by federal or state law or 426 rule to be dispensed only by prescription or is restricted to administration only by practitioners. 427 (23) (a) " Sex characteristic-altering surgical procedure" means, for the purpose of 428 effectuating or facilitating an individual' s attempted sex chang e: 429 (i) castration, orchiectomy, penectomy, vaginoplasty, vulvoplasty, breast aug mentation 430 surgery, or facial feminization surg ery on an individual whose biolog ical sex at birth is male;12-29-22 9:14 AM H.B. 1 32 - 15 -431 (ii) mastectomy , hysterectomy , oophorectomy , metoidioplasty , phalloplasty, or chest or 432 facial masculiniz ation procedures on an individual whose biolog ical sex at birth is female; 433 (iii) any surgical procedure that is related to or necessary for a procedure described in 434 Subsection (23)(a)(i) or (ii), that would result in the steriliz ation of an individual who is 435 non-sterile; or 436 (iv) removing any otherwise healthy or non-diseased body part or tissue. 437 (b) " Sex characteristic-altering surgical procedure" does not include: 438 (i) surg ery or other procedures or treatments performed on an individual who: 439 (A) is born with ex ternal biolog ical sex characteristics that are irresolvably ambig uous; 440 (B) is born with 46, XX chromosomes with viriliz ation; 441 (C) is born with 46, XY chromosomes with underviriliz ation; 442 (D) has both ovarian and testicular tissue; or 443 (E) has been diag nosed by a physician, based on g enetic or biochemical testing , with a 444 sex development disorder characteriz ed by abnormal sex chromosome structure, sex steroid 445 hormone production, or sex steroid hormone action for a male or female; or 446 (ii) removing a body part: 447 (A) because the body part is cancerous or diseased; or 448 (B) for a reason that is medically necessary , other than to effectuate or facilitate an 449 individual' s attempted sex chang e. 450 [(20)] (24) " SPEX" means the Special Purpose Ex amination of the F ederation of State 451 Medical B oards. 452 [(21)] (25) " Unlawful conduct" means the same as that term is defined in Sections 453 58-1-501 and 58-68-501 . 454 [(22)] (26) " Unprofessional conduct" means the same as that term is defined in 455 Sections 58-1-501 and 58-68-502 and as may be further defined by division rule. 456 Section 6. Section 58-68-502 is amended to read: 457 58-68-502. Unprofessional conduct. 458 (1) " Unprofessional conduct" includes, in addition to the definition in Section 459 58-1-501 : 460 (a) using or employing the services of any individual to assist a licensee in any manner 461 not in accordance with the generally recognized practices, standards, or ethics of theH.B. 1 32 12-29-22 9:14 AM - 16 -462 profession, state law, or division rule; 463 (b) violating the dispensing requirements of Chapter 17b, Part 8, Dispensing Medical 464 Practitioner and Dispensing Medical Practitioner Clinic Pharmacy , if applicable; 465 (c) making a material misrepresentation regarding the qualifications for licensure under 466 Section 58-68-302.5 ; 467 (d) violating the requirements of Title 26, Chapter 61a, Utah Medical Cannabis Act; 468 [or] 469 (e) falsely making an entry in, or altering , a medical record with the intent to conceal: 470 (i) a wrongful or negligent act or omission of an individual licensed under this chapter 471 or an individual under the direction or control of an individual licensed under this chapter; or 472 (ii) conduct described in Subsections (1)(a) through (d) or Subsection 58-1-501 (1)[.]; 473 or 474 (f) performing , or causing to be performed, upon a minor as defined in 58-1-511 : 475 (i) a hormonal transgender procedure in violation of Section 58-1-511 ; 476 (ii) a sex characteristic-altering surgical procedure; or 477 (iii) a cosmetic breast surgical procedure. 478 (2) " Unprofessional conduct" does not include: 479 (a) in compliance with Section 58-85-103 : 480 (i) obtaining an investig ational drug or investig ational device; 481 (ii) administering the investig ational drug to an eligible patient; or 482 (iii) treating an eligible patient with the investig ational drug or investig ational device; 483 or 484 (b) in accordance with Title 26, Chapter 61a, Utah Medical Cannabis Act: 485 (i) when registered as a qualified medical provider or acting as a limited medical 486 provider, as those terms are defined in Section 26-61a-102 , recommending the use of medical 487 cannabis; 488 (ii) when registered as a pharmacy medical provider, as that term is defined in Section 489 26-61a-102 , providing pharmacy medical provider services in a medical cannabis pharmacy ; or 490 (iii) when registered as a state central patient portal medical provider, as that term is 491 defined in Section 26-61a-102 , providing state central patient portal medical provider services. 492 (3) Notwithstanding Subsection (2)(b), the division, in consultation with the board and 12-29-22 9:14 AM H.B. 1 32 - 17 -493 in accordance with Title 63G, Chapter 3, Utah Administrative Rulemaking Act, shall define 494 unprofessional conduct for a physician described in Subsection (2)(b). 495 Section 7. Section 58-70a-503 is amended to read: 496 58-70a-503. Unprofessional conduct. 497 (1) " Unprofessional conduct" includes: 498 (a) violation of a patient confidence to any person who does not have a leg al rig ht and a 499 professional need to know the information concerning the patient; 500 (b) knowing ly prescribing , selling , giving away , or directly or indirectly administering , 501 or offering to prescribe, sell, furnish, g ive away , or administer any prescription drug except for 502 a leg itimate medical purpose upon a proper diagnosis indicating use of that drug in the amounts 503 prescribed or provided; 504 (c) prescribing prescription drug s for oneself or administering prescription drug s to 505 oneself, ex cept those that have been leg ally prescribed for the physician assistant by a licensed 506 practitioner and that are used in accordance with the prescription order for the condition 507 diagnosed; 508 (d) in a practice that has physician assistant ownership interests, failure to allow a 509 physician the independent fin al decision making authority on treatment decisions for the 510 physician' s patient; 511 (e) violating the dispensing requirements of Chapter 17b, Part 8, Dispensing Medical 512 Practitioner and Dispensing Medical Practitioner Clinic Pharmacy , if applicable; 513 (f) falsely making an entry in, or altering , a medical record with the intent to conceal: 514 (i) a wrong ful or neg ligent act or omission of an individual licensed under this chapter 515 or an individual under the direction or control of an individual licensed under this chapter; or 516 (ii) conduct described in Subsections (1)(a) throug h (e) or Subsection 58-1-501 (1); 517 [and] 518 (g) violating the requirements of Title 26, Chapter 61a, Utah Medical Cannabis Act[ .]; 519 or 520 (h) performing , or causing to be performed, a hormonal transgender procedure in 521 violation of Section 58-1-511 . 522 (2) (a) " Unprofessional conduct" does not include, in accordance with Title 26, Chapter 523 61a, Utah Medical Cannabis Act, when registered as a qualified medical provider or acting as aH.B. 1 32 12-29-22 9:14 AM - 18 -524 limited medical provider, as those terms are defined in Section 26-61a-102 , recommending the 525 use of medical cannabis. 526 (b) Notwithstanding Subsection (2)(a), the division, in consultation with the board and 527 in accordance with Title 63G, Chapter 3, Utah Administrative Rulemaking Act, shall define 528 unprofessional conduct for a phy sician assistant described in Subsection (2)(a).FIRST REGULAR SESSION HOUSE BILL NO. 463 102ND GENERAL ASSEMBLY INTRODUCED BY REPRESENTATIVE BOYD. DANA RADEMAN MILLER, Chief Clerk AN ACT To repeal sections 568.060 and 578.421, RSMo, and to enact in lieu thereof three new sections relating to gender transition procedures, with penalty provisions. Be it enacted by the General Assembly of the state of Missouri, as follows: Section A. Sections 568.060 and 578.421, RSMo, are repealed and three new sections enacted in lieu thereof, to be known as sections 191.1720, 568.060, and 578.421, to read as follows: 191.1720. 1. This section shall be known and may be cited as the "Missouri Save Adolescents from Experimentation (SAFE) Act". 2. For purposes of this section, the following terms mean: (1) "Biological sex", the biological indication of the physical condition of being male or female, which is determined by an individual's chromosomes, identified at birth by an individual's anatomy, and indicated on the individual's birth certificate, without regard to an individual's psychological, chosen, or subjective experience of gender; (2) "Cross-sex hormones": (a) Testosterone or other androgens given to biological sex females in amounts that are larger or more potent than would normally occur naturally in healthy biological sex females; and (b) Estrogen given to biological sex males in amounts that are larger or more potent than would normally occur naturally in healthy biological sex males; (3) "Gender", the psychological, behavioral, social, and cultural aspects of being male or female; EXPLANATION — Matter enclosed in bold-faced brackets [thus] in the above bill is not enacted and is intended to be omitted from the law. Matter in bold-face type in the above bill is proposed language. HB 463 2 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 (4) "Gender reassignment surgery", any medical or surgical service that alters or removes physical or anatomical characteristics of an individual's biological sex for the purpose of gender transition; (5) "Gender transition", the process in which an individual transitions from his or her biological sex to a gender different from his or her biological sex, which may involve social, legal, or physical changes; (6) "Gender transition procedures": (a) Any medical or surgical service, including, but not limited to, physician's services, inpatient and outpatient hospital services, or prescribed drugs, related to gender transition that seeks to: a. Alter or remove physical or anatomical characteristics or features that are typical for the individual's biological sex; or b. Instill or create physiological or anatomical characteristics that resemble a sex different from the individual's biological sex including, but not limited to: (i) Medical services that provide puberty-blocking drugs, cross-sex hormones, or other mechanisms to promote the development of feminizing or masculinizing features in the opposite biological sex; or (ii) Genital or nongenital gender reassignment surgery performed for the purpose of assisting an individual with a gender transition; (b) The term "gender transition procedures" shall not include: a. Services to individuals born with medically verifiable disorders of sex development, including individuals with external biological sex characteristics that are irresolvably ambiguous, such as those born with forty-six XX chromosomes with virilization or forty-six XY chromosomes with undervirilization; b. Services provided when a physician has otherwise diagnosed an individual with a disorder of sexual development and determined through genetic or biochemical testing that the individual does not have normal sex chromosome structure, sex steroid hormone production, or sex steroid hormone action; or c. The treatment of any infection, injury, disease, or disorder that has been caused by or exacerbated by the performance of gender transition procedures regardless of whether the gender transition procedure was performed in accordance with state and federal law; (7) "Genital gender reassignment surgery", a medical procedure performed for the purpose of assisting an individual with a gender transition including, but not limited to: HB 463 3 (a) Surgical procedures such as penectomy, orchiectomy, vaginoplasty, clitoroplasty, or vulvoplasty for biologically male patients or hysterectomy or ovariectomy for biologically female patients; (b) Reconstruction of the fixed part of the urethra with or without a metoidioplasty; or (c) Phalloplasty, vaginectomy, scrotoplasty, or implantation of erection or testicular prostheses for biologically female patients; (8) "Health care provider", an individual who is licensed, certified, or otherwise authorized by the laws of this state to administer health care in the ordinary course of the practice of his or her profession; (9) "Nongenital gender reassignment surgery", medical procedures performed for the purpose of assisting an individual with a gender transition including, but not limited to: (a) Surgical procedures for biologically male patients, such as augmentation mammoplasty, facial feminization surgery, liposuction, lipofilling, voice surgery, thyroid cartilage reduction, gluteal augmentation, hair reconstruction, or various aesthetic procedures; or (b) Surgical procedures for biologically female patients, such as subcutaneous mastectomy, voice surgery, liposuction, lipofilling, pectoral implants, or various aesthetic procedures; (10) "Physician", an individual who is licensed as a physician under chapter 334; (11) "Puberty-blocking drugs", gonadotropin-releasing hormone analogues or other synthetic drugs used in biological sex males to stop luteinizing hormone secretion and therefore testosterone secretion, or synthetic drugs used in biological sex females that stop the production of estrogens and progesterone, when used to delay or suppress pubertal development in children for the purpose of assisting an individual with a gender transition. 3. A physician or other health care provider shall not provide gender transition procedures to any individual under eighteen years of age and shall not refer any individual under eighteen years of age to any health care provider for gender transition procedures. 4. Any physician or health care provider who willfully and knowingly commits or assists any prohibited action under subsection 3 of this section shall have his or her license, application for license, or authority to practice his or her profession as a physician, surgeon, nurse, or other health care provider in the state of Missouri rejected or revoked by his or her respective licensing board. HB 463 4 87 88 years of age in violation of the provisions of this section shall be considered grounds for 89 a cause of action against the health care provider for personal injury or death under 90 chapter 538 and such cause of action shall be governed by the provisions of such 91 chapter. An individual under eighteen years of age upon whom gender transition 92 procedures were performed in violation of this section may bring the cause of action 93 either through a next friend or in his or her own name, subject to the provisions of 94 section 516.105. 568.060. 1. As used in this section, the following terms shall mean: 2 (1) "Abuse", the infliction of physical, sexual, or mental injury against a child by any 3 person eighteen years of age or older. For purposes of this section, abuse shall not include 4 injury inflicted on a child by accidental means by a person with care, custody, or control of 5 the child, or discipline of a child by a person with care, custody, or control of the child, 6 including spanking, in a reasonable manner; 7 (2) "Abusive head trauma", a serious physical injury to the head or brain caused by 8 any means, including but not limited to shaking, jerking, pushing, pulling, slamming, hitting, 9 or kicking; 10 (3) "Mental injury", an injury to the intellectual or psychological capacity or the 11 emotional condition of a child as evidenced by an observable and substantial impairment of 12 the ability of the child to function within his or her normal range of performance or behavior; 13 (4) "Neglect", the failure to provide, by those responsible for the care, custody, and 14 control of a child under the age of eighteen years, the care reasonable and necessary to 15 maintain the physical and mental health of the child, when such failure presents a substantial 16 probability that death or physical injury or sexual injury would result; 17 (5) "Physical injury", physical pain, illness, or any impairment of physical condition, 18 including but not limited to bruising, lacerations, hematomas, welts, or permanent or 19 temporary disfigurement and impairment of any bodily function or organ; 20 (6) "Serious emotional injury", an injury that creates a substantial risk of temporary or 21 permanent medical or psychological damage, manifested by impairment of a behavioral, 22 cognitive, or physical condition. Serious emotional injury shall be established by testimony 23 of qualified experts upon the reasonable expectation of probable harm to a reasonable degree 24 of medical or psychological certainty; 25 (7) "Serious physical injury", a physical injury that creates a substantial risk of death 26 or that causes serious disfigurement or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any 27 part of the body. 28 2. A person commits the offense of abuse or neglect of a child if such person 29 knowingly causes a child who is less than eighteen years of age: 5. The provision of gender transition procedures to an individual under eighteen 5 (1) To suffer physical or mental injury as a result of abuse or neglect; or (2) To be placed in a situation in which the child may suffer physical or mental injury as the result of abuse or neglect. 3. A person commits the offense of abuse or neglect of a child if such person recklessly causes a child who is less than eighteen years of age to suffer from abusive head trauma. 4. A person commits the offense of abuse or neglect of a child if such person coerces a child who is under eighteen years of age to undergo any surgical or hormonal treatment for the purpose of gender transition, as defined in section 191.1720. 5. A person does not commit the offense of abuse or neglect of a child by virtue of the sole fact that the person delivers or allows the delivery of a child to a provider of emergency services. [5.] 6. The offense of abuse or neglect of a child is: (1) A class D felony, without eligibility for probation, parole, or conditional release until the defendant has served no less than one year of such sentence, unless the person has previously been found guilty of a violation of this section or of a violation of the law of any other jurisdiction that prohibits the same or similar conduct or the injury inflicted on the child is a serious emotional injury or a serious physical injury, in which case abuse or neglect of a child is a class B felony, without eligibility for probation or parole until the defendant has served not less than five years of such sentence; or (2) A class A felony if the child dies as a result of injuries sustained from conduct chargeable under the provisions of this section. [6.] 7. Notwithstanding subsection [5] 6 of this section to the contrary, the offense of abuse or neglect of a child is a class A felony, without eligibility for probation, parole, or conditional release until the defendant has served not less than fifteen years of such sentence, if: (1) The injury is a serious emotional injury or a serious physical injury; (2) The child is less than fourteen years of age; and (3) The injury is the result of sexual abuse or sexual abuse in the first degree as defined under section 566.100 or sexual exploitation of a minor as defined under section 573.023. [7.] 8. The circuit or prosecuting attorney may refer a person who is suspected of abuse or neglect of a child to an appropriate public or private agency for treatment or counseling so long as the agency has consented to taking such referrals. Nothing in this subsection shall limit the discretion of the circuit or prosecuting attorney to prosecute a person who has been referred for treatment or counseling pursuant to this subsection. HB 463 element of any crime referred to herein must be proven beyond a reasonable doubt. 68 [9.] 10. Discipline, including spanking administered in a reasonable manner, shall not 69 be construed to be abuse under this section. 578.421. 1. Sections 578.421 to 578.437 shall be known and may be cited as the 2 "Missouri Criminal Street Gangs Prevention Act". 3 2. As used in sections 578.421 to 578.437, the following terms mean: 4 (1) "Criminal street gang", any ongoing organization, association, or group of three or 5 more persons, whether formal or informal, having as one of its motivating activities the 6 commission of one or more of the criminal acts enumerated in subdivision (2) of this 7 subsection, whose members individually or collectively engage in or have engaged in a 8 pattern of criminal gang activity; 9 (2) "Pattern of criminal street gang activity", the commission, attempted commission, 10 or solicitation of two or more of the following offenses, provided at least one of those 11 offenses occurred after August 28, 1993, and the last of those offenses occurred within three 12 years after a prior offense, and the offenses are committed on separate occasions, or by two or 13 more persons: 14 (a) Assault with a deadly weapon or by means of force likely to cause serious 15 physical injury, as provided in sections 565.050 and 565.052; [8.] 9. Nothing in this section shall be construed to alter the requirement that every 16 (b) 17 and arson; 18 (c) 19 (d) 20 delivery or manufacture of a substance prohibited by chapter 579; 21 (e) Unlawful use of a weapon which is a felony pursuant to section 571.030; 22 (f) Tampering with witnesses and victims, as provided in section 575.270; 23 (g) Promoting online sexual solicitation, as provided in section 566.103; 24 (h) Sexual trafficking of a child in the first degree, as provided in section 566.210; 25 (i) Sexual trafficking of a child in the second degree, as provided in section 566.211; 26 (j) Patronizing prostitution, as provided in subsection 4 of section 567.030; 27 (k) Promoting prostitution in the first degree, as provided in section 567.050; 28 (l) Promoting prostitution in the second degree, as provided in section 567.060; 29 (m) Abuse or neglect of a child, as provided in subsection [6] 7 of section 568.060; 30 (n) Sexual exploitation of a minor, as provided in section 573.023; 31 (o) Child used in sexual performance, as provided in section 573.200; 32 (p) Promoting sexual performance by a child, as provided in section 573.205; or 33 (q) Any dangerous felony, as defined in section 556.061. Robbery, arson and those offenses under chapter 569 which are related to robbery Murder or manslaughter, as provided in sections 565.020 to 565.024; Any violation of the provisions of chapter 579 which involves the distribution, ✔FIRST REGULAR SESSION HOUSE BILL NO. 419 102ND GENERAL ASSEMBLY INTRODUCED BY REPRESENTATIVE HUDSON. DANA RADEMAN MILLER, Chief Clerk AN ACT To amend chapters 191 and 376, RSMo, by adding thereto eight new sections relating to gender transition procedures, with a contingent effective date. Be it enacted by the General Assembly of the state of Missouri, as follows: Section A. Chapters 191 and 376, RSMo, are amended by adding thereto eight new sections, to be known as sections 191.1720, 191.1725, 191.1730, 191.1732, 191.1735, 191.1740, 191.1745, and 376.1280, to read as follows: 191.1720. Sections 191.1720 to 191.1745 and section 376.1280 shall be known and may be cited as the "Missouri's Children Deserve Help Not Harm Act". 191.1725. For purposes of sections 191.1725 to 191.1745, the following terms mean: (1) "Biological sex", the biological indication of male or female in the context of reproductive potential or capacity, such as sex chromosomes, naturally occurring sex hormones, gonads, and nonambiguous internal and external genitalia present at birth, including secondary sex characteristics; (2) "Cross-sex hormones": (a) Testosterone or other androgens given to biological females in amounts that create serum levels greater than would normally occur naturally in healthy biological females, which may include, but are not limited to, the following risks: a. Irreversible infertility; b. Severe liver dysfunction; c. Coronary artery disease, including heart attacks; d. Increased risk of breast, cervical, and uterine cancers; EXPLANATION — Matter enclosed in bold-faced brackets [thus] in the above bill is not enacted and is intended to be omitted from the law. Matter in bold-face type in the above bill is proposed language. HB 419 2 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 greater than would normally occur naturally in healthy biological males, which may 24 include, but are not limited to, the following risks: e. Cerebrovascular disease, including strokes; f. Hypertension; g. Erythrocytosis, which is an increase in red blood cells; h. Sleep apnea; i. Type 2 diabetes; j. Loss of bone density; and k. Destabilization of psychiatric disorders; and (b) Estrogen given to biological males in amounts that create serum levels 25 a. Irreversible infertility; 26 b. Thromboembolic disease, including blood clots; 27 c. Cholelithiasis, including gallstones; 28 d. Coronary artery disease, including heart attacks; 29 e. Type 2 diabetes; 30 f. Breast cancer; 31 g. Macroprolactinoma, which is a tumor of the pituitary gland; 32 h. Cerebrovascular disease, including strokes; and 33 i. Hypertriglyceridemia, which is an elevated level of triglycerides in the blood; 34 (3) "Gender", the psychological, behavioral, social, and cultural aspects of being 35 male or female; 36 (4) "Gender reassignment surgery", any surgical service that seeks to surgically 37 alter or remove healthy physical or anatomical characteristics or features that are 38 typical for the individual's biological sex in order to instill or create physiological or 39 anatomical characteristics that resemble a sex different from the individual's biological 40 sex including, but not limited to, genital or nongenital gender reassignment surgery 41 performed for the purpose of assisting an individual with a gender transition; 42 (5) "Gender transition", the process in which an individual goes from 43 identifying with and living as a gender that corresponds to his or her biological sex to 44 identifying with and living as a gender different from his or her biological sex and may 45 involve social, legal, or physical changes; 46 (6) "Gender transition procedure": 47 (a) Any medical or surgical service, including, but not limited to, physician's 48 services, inpatient and outpatient hospital services, puberty-blocking drugs, cross-sex 49 hormones, or genital or nongenital gender reassignment surgery, that is provided or 50 performed for the purpose of assisting an individual with a physical gender transition; 51 (b) The term "gender transition procedure" shall not include: HB 419 a. Services to individuals born with a medically verifiable disorder of sex development including, but not limited to, an individual with external biological sex characteristics that are irresolvably ambiguous, such as those born with 46,XX chromosomes with virilization, 46,XY chromosomes with undervirilization, or having both ovarian and testicular tissue; b. Services provided when a physician has otherwise diagnosed an individual with a disorder of sexual development and determined through genetic or biochemical testing that the individual does not have normal sex chromosome structure, sex steroid production, or sex steroid hormone action; c. The acute or chronic treatment of any infection, injury, disease, or disorder that has been caused by or exacerbated by the performance of gender transition procedures regardless of whether the gender transition procedure was performed in accordance with state and federal law or whether funding for the gender transition procedure is permissible under section 191.1735; or d. Any procedure undertaken because the individual suffers from a physical disorder, physical injury, or physical illness that would, as certified by a physician, place the individual in imminent danger of death or impairment of a major bodily function unless surgery is performed; (7) "Genital gender reassignment surgery", a surgical procedure performed for the purpose of assisting an individual with a physical gender transition including, but not limited to: (a) Surgical procedures such as penectomy, orchiectomy, vaginoplasty, clitoroplasty, or vulvoplasty for biologically male patients; or (b) Surgical procedures such as hysterectomy, oophorectomy, reconstruction of the urethra, metoidioplasty or phalloplasty, vaginectomy, scrotoplasty, implantation of erection prostheses, or implantation of testicular prostheses for biologically female patients; (8) "Health care professional", an individual who is licensed, certified, or otherwise authorized by the laws of this state to administer health care in the ordinary course of the practice of his or her profession, including mental health care providers; (9) "Nongenital gender reassignment surgery", surgical procedures performed for the purpose of assisting an individual with a physical gender transition including, but not limited to: (a) Surgical procedures for biologically male patients, such as augmentation mammoplasty, facial feminization surgery, liposuction, lipofilling, voice feminization surgery, thyroid cartilage reduction, gluteal augmentation, hair reconstruction, or various aesthetic procedures; or (b) Surgical procedures for biologically female patients, such as subcutaneous mastectomy, voice masculinization surgery, liposuction, lipofilling, pectoral implants, or various aesthetic procedures; (10) "Physician", an individual who is licensed to practice medicine in this state; (11) "Puberty-blocking drugs", gonadotropin-releasing hormone analogues or other synthetic drugs used in biological males to stop luteinizing hormone secretion and therefore testosterone production, or synthetic drugs used in biological females that stop the production of estrogen and progesterone, when used to delay or suppress pubertal development in children for the purpose of assisting an individual with a gender transition; (12) "Public funds", state, county, or local government moneys, including any such moneys deposited with or derived from any department, agency, or instrumentality authorized or appropriated under state law. 191.1730. 1. A physician or other health care professional shall not provide gender transition procedures to any individual under eighteen years of age. 2. A health care institution or entity shall not facilitate the provision of gender transition procedures to any individual under eighteen years of age. 191.1732. 1. A person or entity, including employees of other state governments, the federal government, or foreign governments, shall not knowingly engage in conduct that aids or abets the performance or inducement of gender transition procedures on any individual under eighteen years of age. 2. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any speech protected by the First Amendment of the United States Constitution. 3. No parent of a child victim shall be held liable under this section. 191.1735. 1. Public funds shall not be directly or indirectly used, granted, paid, or distributed to any individual, entity, or organization that provides gender transition procedures to an individual under eighteen years of age. 2. Health care services furnished in the following situations shall not include gender transition procedures to an individual under eighteen years of age: (1) By or in a facility owned by the state or a county or local government; or (2) By a physician or other health care professional employed by the state or a county or local government. 3. Any amount paid by an individual or an entity during a tax year for the provision of gender transition procedures or as premiums for health care coverage that includes coverage for gender transition procedures shall not be tax deductible. 4. The MO HealthNet program shall not reimburse or provide coverage for gender transition procedures to an individual under eighteen years of age. HB 419 4 HB 419 5 191.1740. Any referral for or provision of gender transition procedures to an 2 individual under eighteen years of age is unprofessional conduct and shall be subject to 3 discipline by the appropriate licensing entity or disciplinary review board with 4 competent jurisdiction in this state. 191.1745. 1. (1) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, an individual 2 under eighteen years of age may bring an action under sections 191.1725 to 191.1745 3 throughout the individual's minority through a parent or next friend and may bring an 4 action under sections 191.1725 to 191.1745 in the individual's own name upon reaching 5 the age of majority at any time from that point until thirty years after reaching the age 6 of majority. 7 (2) If at the time the individual abused attains the age of eighteen years he or she 8 is under other legal disability, the limitation period under subdivision (1) of this 9 subsection shall not begin to run until the removal of the disability. 10 (3) The limitation period in subdivision (1) of this subsection shall not run 11 during a time period when the individual is subject to threats, intimidation, 12 manipulation, fraudulent concealment, or fraud perpetrated by the physician or other 13 health care professional who prescribed or otherwise provided gender transition 14 procedures or by any person acting in the interest of the physician or other health care 15 professional. 16 2. (1) An individual may assert an actual or threatened violation of sections 17 191.1725 to 191.1745 as a claim or defense in a judicial or administrative proceeding. 18 (2) The following damages may be awarded to a claimant described in 19 subdivision (1) of this subsection: 20 (a) Compensatory damages including, but not limited to: 21 a. Pain and suffering; 22 b. Loss of reputation; 23 c. Loss of income; and 24 d. Loss of consortium including, but not limited to, the loss of expectation of 25 sharing parenthood; 26 (b) Injunctive relief; 27 (c) Declaratory relief; 28 (d) Punitive damages; and 29 (e) Any other appropriate relief. 30 (3) A prevailing party who establishes a violation of sections 191.1725 to 31 191.1745 shall recover reasonable attorney's fees. 32 3. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, an action under sections 191.1725 33 to 191.1745 may be commenced, and relief may be granted, in a judicial proceeding HB 419 6 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 without regard to whether the individual commencing the action has sought or exhausted available administrative remedies. 4. (1) The attorney general may bring an action to enforce compliance with sections 191.1725 to 191.1745. (2) Sections 191.1725 to 191.1745 do not deny, impair, or otherwise affect any right or authority of the attorney general, the state, or any agency, officer, or employee of the state, acting under any law other than sections 191.1725 to 191.1745, to institute or intervene in any proceeding. 376.1280. 1. For purposes of this section, the following terms mean: (1) "Gender transition procedure", the same meaning given to the term in section 191.1725; (2) "Health benefit plan", the same meaning given to the term in section 376.1350; (3) "Health carrier", the same meaning given to the term in section 376.1350. 2. A health carrier or health benefit plan that offers or issues health benefit plans that are delivered, issued for delivery, continued, or renewed in this state on or after the effective date of this section shall not include reimbursement for gender transition procedures for an individual under eighteen years of age. 3. A health carrier or health benefit plan that offers or issues health benefit plans that are delivered, issued for delivery, continued, or renewed in this state on or after the effective date of this section shall not be required to provide coverage for gender transition procedures. 4. A federal health benefit plan under an insurance policy or other plan providing health care coverage, such as TriCare or Veterans Administration health care, shall not include reimbursement for gender transition procedures for an individual under eighteen years of age in this state. Section B. The enactment of sections 191.1720 to 191.1745 and section 376.1280 of this act shall become effective: (1) August 28, 2023, upon signature of the governor before March 1, 2023; (2) Six months from the date of the governor's signature if signed by the governor on or after March 1, 2023; (3) January 15, 2024, if the bill is not signed and returned by the governor within the constitutional time limits; or (4) March 23, 2024, if the governor vetoes the bill and the general assembly overrides the governor's veto. ✔UNOFFICIAL COPY 23 RS BR 384 Page 1 of 3 XXXX 12/9/2022 12:25 PM Jacketed AN ACT relating to public school facilities and declaring an emergency. 1 Be it enacted by the General Assembly of the Commonwealth of Kentucky: 2 SECTION 1. A NEW SECTION OF KRS CHAPTER 158 IS CREATED TO 3 READ AS FOLLOWS: 4 As used in Sections 1 to 3 of this Act: 5 (1) "Biological sex" means the physical condition of being male or female, which is 6 determined by a person's chrom osomes, and is identified at birth by a person's 7 anatomy; 8 (2) "School" means a school under the control of a local board of education of a 9 local school district; and 10 (3) "Unisex restroom" means a restroom designed to be suitable for both sexes. 11 SECTION 2. A NEW SECTION OF KRS CHAPTER 158 IS CREATED TO 12 READ AS FOLLOWS: 13 The General Assembly finds that: 14 (1) School personnel have a duty to p rotect the dignity, health, welfare, and privacy 15 rights of students in their care; 16 (2) Children and young adults have natural and normal concerns about privacy 17 while in various states of undress, and most wish for members of the opposite 18 biological sex no t to be present in those circumstances; 19 (3) Allowing students to use restrooms, locker rooms, or shower rooms that are 20 reserved for students of a different biological sex: 21 (a) Will create a significant potential for disruption of school activities and 22 unsa fe conditions; and 23 (b) Will create potential embarrassment, shame, and psychological injury to 24 students; 25 (4) Parents have a reasonable expectation that schools will not allow minor children 26 to be viewed in various states of undress by members of the opposi te biological 27 UNOFFICIAL COPY 23 RS BR 384 Page 2 of 3 XXXX 12/9/2022 12:25 PM Jacketed sex, nor allow minor children to view members of the opposite sex in various 1 states of undress; and 2 (5) Schools have a duty to respect and protect the privacy rights of students, 3 including the right not to be compelled to undress or be unclot hed in the presence 4 of members of the opposite biological sex. 5 SECTION 3. A NEW SECTION OF KRS CHAPTER 158 IS CREATED TO 6 READ AS FOLLOWS: 7 (1) Every school restroom, locker room, and shower room designated for student us e 8 accessible by multiple students at the same time shall be designated for and used 9 by male students only or female students only. 10 (2) In every school setting in which a student may be in a state of undress in the 11 presence of other students, school personn el shall provide separate, private areas 12 designated for use by students based on their biological sex. 13 (3) (a) A student who asserts to school officials that his or her gender is different 14 from his or her biological sex and whose parent or legal guardian provides 15 written consent to school officials shall be provided with the best available 16 accommodation, but that accommodation shall not include the use of school 17 restrooms, unisex restrooms, locker rooms, or shower rooms designated for 18 use by students of th e opposite biological sex while students of the opposite 19 biological sex are present or could be present. 20 (b) Acceptable accommodations may include but are not limited to access to 21 single -stall restrooms or controlled use of faculty bathrooms, locker rooms , 22 or shower rooms. 23 (4) (a) While accessing a restroom, locker room, or shower room designated for 24 use by his or her biological sex, a student encountering a person of the 25 opposite biological sex shall have a private cause of action against the 26 school if sc hool personnel: 27 UNOFFICIAL COPY 23 RS BR 384 Page 3 of 3 XXXX 12/9/2022 12:25 PM Jacketed 1. Gave the person encountered permission to use facilities of the 1 opposite biological sex; or 2 2. Failed to take reasonable steps to prohibit the person encountered 3 from using facilities designated for use by the opposite biological sex. 4 (b) Any claims arising pursuant to this subsection shall be brought in the 5 Circuit Court in whose jurisdiction the student resides or where the school 6 is located. All claims must be initiated within two (2) years of the violation. 7 (c) The offending school sh all be civilly liable to a student who is aggrieved 8 under this subsection and who prevails in a court of jurisdiction prescribed 9 by paragraph (b) of this subsection. The student shall be entitled to recover 10 from the offending school any costs, expenses, an d fees, including 11 attorney's fees, associated with the claim. 12 (d) Nothing in this subsection shall limit other remedies at law or equity 13 available to the aggrieved student. 14 (5) Any section or portion of Sections 1 to 3 of this Act declared invalid shall not 15 affect the validity of the remaining portions of Sections 1 to 3 of this Act. 16 Section 4. Whereas situations currently exist in which the privacy rights of 17 students are violated, an emergency is declared to exist, and this Act takes effect upon its 18 passage and approval by the Governor or upon its otherwise becoming a law. 19 FIRST REGULAR SESSION HOUSE BILL NO. 540 102ND GENERAL ASSEMBLY INTRODUCED BY REPRESENTATIVE SPARKS. DANA RADEMAN MILLER, Chief Clerk AN ACT 2 3 2 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 To amend chapters 191 and 376, RSMo, by adding thereto ten new sections relating to gender transition procedures, with a delayed effective date. Be it enacted by the General Assembly of the state of Missouri, as follows: Section A. Chapters 191 and 376, RSMo, are amended by adding thereto ten new sections, to be known as sections 191.1720, 191.1725, 191.1730, 191.1732, 191.1735, 191.1740, 191.1745, 191.1748, 191.1749, and 376.1280, to read as follows: 191.1720. Sections 191.1720 to 191.1749 and section 376.1280 shall be known and may be cited as the "Missouri's Children Deserve Help Not Harm Act". 191.1725. For purposes of sections 191.1725 to 191.1749, the following terms mean: (1) "Biological sex", the biological indication of male or female in the context of reproductive potential or capacity, such as sex chromosomes, naturally occurring sex hormones, gonads, and nonambiguous internal and external genitalia present at birth, including secondary sex characteristics; (2) "Cross-sex hormones": (a) Testosterone or other androgens given to biological females in amounts that create serum levels greater than would normally occur naturally in healthy biological females, which may include, but are not limited to, the following risks: a. Irreversible infertility; b. Severe liver dysfunction; c. Coronary artery disease, including heart attacks; d. Increased risk of breast, cervical, and uterine cancers; EXPLANATION — Matter enclosed in bold-faced brackets [thus] in the above bill is not enacted and is intended to be omitted from the law. Matter in bold-face type in the above bill is proposed language. HB 540 2 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 greater than would normally occur naturally in healthy biological males, which may 24 include, but are not limited to, the following risks: e. Cerebrovascular disease, including strokes; f. Hypertension; g. Erythrocytosis, which is an increase in red blood cells; h. Sleep apnea; i. Type 2 diabetes; j. Loss of bone density; and k. Destabilization of psychiatric disorders; and (b) Estrogen given to biological males in amounts that create serum levels 25 a. Irreversible infertility; 26 b. Thromboembolic disease, including blood clots; 27 c. Cholelithiasis, including gallstones; 28 d. Coronary artery disease, including heart attacks; 29 e. Type 2 diabetes; 30 f. Breast cancer; 31 g. Macroprolactinoma, which is a tumor of the pituitary gland; 32 h. Cerebrovascular disease, including strokes; and 33 i. Hypertriglyceridemia, which is an elevated level of triglycerides in the blood; 34 (3) "Gender", the psychological, behavioral, social, and cultural aspects of being 35 male or female; 36 (4) "Gender reassignment surgery", any surgical service that seeks to surgically 37 alter or remove healthy physical or anatomical characteristics or features that are 38 typical for the individual's biological sex in order to instill or create physiological or 39 anatomical characteristics that resemble a sex different from the individual's biological 40 sex including, but not limited to, genital or nongenital gender reassignment surgery 41 performed for the purpose of assisting an individual with a gender transition; 42 (5) "Gender transition", the process in which an individual goes from 43 identifying with and living as a gender that corresponds to his or her biological sex to 44 identifying with and living as a gender different from his or her biological sex, and may 45 involve social, legal, or physical changes; 46 (6) "Gender transition procedure": 47 (a) Any medical or surgical service, including, but not limited to, physician's 48 services, inpatient and outpatient hospital services, puberty-blocking drugs, cross-sex 49 hormones, or genital or nongenital gender reassignment surgery, that is provided or 50 performed for the purpose of assisting an individual with a physical gender transition; 51 (b) The term "gender transition procedure" shall not include: HB 540 3 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 80 81 82 83 84 85 86 87 88 a. Services to individuals born with a medically verifiable disorder of sex development including, but not limited to, an individual with external biological sex characteristics that are irresolvably ambiguous, such as those born with 46,XX chromosomes with virilization, 46,XY chromosomes with undervirilization, or having both ovarian and testicular tissue; b. Services provided when a physician has otherwise diagnosed an individual with a disorder of sexual development and determined through genetic or biochemical testing that the individual does not have normal sex chromosome structure, sex steroid production, or sex steroid hormone action; c. The acute or chronic treatment of any infection, injury, disease, or disorder that has been caused by or exacerbated by the performance of gender transition procedures regardless of whether the gender transition procedure was performed in accordance with state and federal law or whether funding for the gender transition procedure is permissible under section 191.1735; or d. Any procedure undertaken because the individual suffers from a physical disorder, physical injury, or physical illness that would, as certified by a physician, place the individual in imminent danger of death or impairment of a major bodily function unless surgery is performed; (7) "Genital gender reassignment surgery", a surgical procedure performed for the purpose of assisting an individual with a physical gender transition including, but not limited to: (a) Surgical procedures such as penectomy, orchiectomy, vaginoplasty, clitoroplasty, or vulvoplasty for biologically male patients; or (b) Surgical procedures such as hysterectomy, oophorectomy, reconstruction of the urethra, metoidioplasty or phalloplasty, vaginectomy, scrotoplasty, implantation of erection prostheses, or implantation of testicular prostheses for biologically female patients; (8) "Health care professional", an individual who is licensed, certified, or otherwise authorized by the laws of this state to administer health care in the ordinary course of the practice of his or her profession, including mental health care providers; (9) "Nongenital gender reassignment surgery", surgical procedures performed for the purpose of assisting an individual with a physical gender transition including, but not limited to: (a) Surgical procedures for biologically male patients, such as augmentation mammoplasty, facial feminization surgery, liposuction, lipofilling, voice feminization surgery, thyroid cartilage reduction, gluteal augmentation, hair reconstruction, or various aesthetic procedures; or 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 100 101 2 3 4 2 3 4 5 6 7 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 (b) Surgical procedures for biologically female patients, such as subcutaneous mastectomy, voice masculinization surgery, liposuction, lipofilling, pectoral implants, or various aesthetic procedures; (10) "Physician", an individual who is licensed to practice medicine in this state; (11) "Puberty-blocking drugs", gonadotropin-releasing hormone analogues or other synthetic drugs used in biological males to stop luteinizing hormone secretion and therefore testosterone production, or synthetic drugs used in biological females that stop the production of estrogen and progesterone, when used to delay or suppress pubertal development in children for the purpose of assisting an individual with a gender transition; (12) "Public funds", state, county, or local government moneys, including any such moneys deposited with or derived from any department, agency, or instrumentality authorized or appropriated under state law. 191.1730. 1. A physician or other health care professional shall not provide gender transition procedures to any individual under eighteen years of age. 2. A health care institution or entity shall not facilitate the provision of gender transition procedures to any individual under eighteen years of age. 191.1732. 1. A person or entity, including employees of other state governments, the federal government, or foreign governments, shall not knowingly engage in conduct that aids or abets the performance or inducement of gender transition procedures on any individual under eighteen years of age. 2. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any speech protected by the First Amendment of the United States Constitution. 3. No parent of a child victim shall be held liable under this section. 191.1735. 1. Public funds shall not be directly or indirectly used, granted, paid, or distributed to any individual, entity, or organization that provides gender transition procedures to an individual under eighteen years of age. 2. Health care services furnished in the following situations shall not include gender transition procedures to an individual under eighteen years of age: (1) By or in a facility owned by the state or a county or local government; or (2) By a physician or other health care professional employed by the state or a county or local government. 3. Any amount paid by an individual or an entity during a tax year for the provision of gender transition procedures or as premiums for health care coverage that includes coverage for gender transition procedures shall not be tax deductible. 4. The MO HealthNet program shall not reimburse or provide coverage for gender transition procedures to an individual under eighteen years of age. HB 540 4 HB 540 5 191.1740. Any referral for or provision of gender transition procedures to an 2 individual under eighteen years of age is unprofessional conduct and shall be subject to 3 discipline by the appropriate licensing entity or disciplinary review board with 4 competent jurisdiction in this state. 191.1745. 1. (1) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, an individual 2 under eighteen years of age may bring an action under sections 191.1725 to 191.1749 3 throughout the individual's minority through a parent or next friend and may bring an 4 action under sections 191.1725 to 191.1749 in the individual's own name upon reaching 5 the age of majority at any time from that point until thirty years after reaching the age 6 of majority. 7 (2) If at the time the individual abused attains the age of eighteen years he or she 8 is under other legal disability, the limitation period under subdivision (1) of this 9 subsection shall not begin to run until the removal of the disability. 10 (3) The limitation period in subdivision (1) of this subsection shall not run 11 during a time period when the individual is subject to threats, intimidation, 12 manipulation, fraudulent concealment, or fraud perpetrated by the physician or other 13 health care professional who prescribed or otherwise provided gender transition 14 procedures or by any person acting in the interest of the physician or other health care 15 professional. 16 2. (1) An individual may assert an actual or threatened violation of sections 17 191.1725 to 191.1749 as a claim or defense in a judicial or administrative proceeding. 18 (2) The following damages may be awarded to a claimant described in 19 subdivision (1) of this subsection: 20 (a) Compensatory damages including, but not limited to: 21 a. Pain and suffering; 22 b. Loss of reputation; 23 c. Loss of income; and 24 d. Loss of consortium including, but not limited to, the loss of expectation of 25 sharing parenthood; 26 (b) Injunctive relief; 27 (c) Declaratory relief; 28 (d) Punitive damages; and 29 (e) Any other appropriate relief. 30 (3) A prevailing party who establishes a violation of sections 191.1725 to 31 191.1749 shall recover reasonable attorney's fees. 32 3. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, an action under sections 191.1725 33 to 191.1749 may be commenced, and relief may be granted, in a judicial proceeding HB 540 6 34 without regard to whether the individual commencing the action has sought or 35 exhausted available administrative remedies. 36 4. (1) The attorney general may bring an action to enforce compliance with 37 sections 191.1725 to 191.1749. 38 (2) Sections 191.1725 to 191.1749 do not deny, impair, or otherwise affect any 39 right or authority of the attorney general, the state, or any agency, officer, or employee 40 of the state, acting under any law other than sections 191.1725 to 191.1749, to institute 41 or intervene in any proceeding. 191.1748. The general assembly, by joint resolution, may appoint one or more of 2 its members who sponsored or cosponsored the legislation enacting sections 191.1720 to 3 191.1749 and section 376.1280 in his or her official capacity to intervene or defend such 4 legislation as a matter of right in any case in which the constitutionality or enforceability 5 of the legislation, any portion thereof, or any rule or regulation adopted thereunder is 6 challenged. 191.1749. Any provision of sections 191.1720 to 191.1749 or section 376.1280 2 held to be invalid or unenforceable by its terms, or as applied to any person or 3 circumstance, shall be construed so as to give it the maximum effect permitted by law, 4 unless such holding shall be one of utter invalidity or unenforceability, in which event 5 such provision shall be deemed severable herefrom and shall not affect the remainder 6 hereof or the application of such provision to other persons not similarly situated or to 7 other dissimilar circumstances. 376.1280. 1. For purposes of this section, the following terms mean: 2 (1) "Gender transition procedure", the same meaning given to the term in 3 section 191.1725; 4 (2) "Health benefit plan", the same meaning given to the term in section 5 376.1350; 6 (3) "Health carrier", the same meaning given to the term in section 376.1350. 7 2. A health carrier or health benefit plan that offers or issues health benefit 8 plans that are delivered, issued for delivery, continued, or renewed in this state on or 9 after January 1, 2024, shall not include reimbursement for gender transition procedures 10 for an individual under eighteen years of age. 11 3. A health carrier or health benefit plan that offers or issues health benefit 12 plans that are delivered, issued for delivery, continued, or renewed in this state on or 13 after January 1, 2024, shall not be required to provide coverage for gender transition 14 procedures. 15 4. A federal health benefit plan under an insurance policy or other plan 16 providing health care coverage, such as TriCare or Veterans Administration health care, HB 540 7 17 shall not include reimbursement for gender transition procedures for an individual 18 under eighteen years of age in this state. Section B. The enactment of sections 191.1720 to 191.1749 and section 376.1280 of 2 this act shall become effective on January 1, 2024. ✔ Req. No. 3 Page 1  STATE OF OKLAHOMA 1st Session of the 59th Legislature (2023) SENATE BILL 129 By: Bullard AS INTRODUCED An Act relating to health care; creating the Millstone Act of 2023 ; defining terms; p rohibiting provision of or referral for gender tran sition procedures ; providing exceptions; pro hibiting certain uses of public funds, public facilities , public employees , and state Medicaid program ; providing for criminal, administrative , and civil enforce ment; authorizing certain civil actions and relief ; providing certain construction; providing for codification; and declari ng an emergency . BE IT ENACTED BY THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF OKLAHOMA: SECTION 1. NEW LAW A new s ection of law to be codified in the Oklahoma Statut es as Section 2607.1 of Title 63, unless there is created a duplication in numbering, reads as follows: This act shall be known and may be cited as the Millstone Act o f 2023. SECTION 2. NEW LAW A new section of law to be codified in the Oklahoma Statutes as Section 2607.2 of Title 63, unless there is created a duplication in numbering, reads as follows: As used in this act: Req. No. 3 Page 2  1. “Biological sex ” means the bi ological indication of male and female in the context of reproductive potentia l or capacity, such as sex chromosomes, naturally occurring sex hormones, gonads, and nonambiguous internal and external genita lia present at birth, without regard to an individu al’s psychological, chosen, or subjective experience of gender; 2. “Cross-sex hormones ” means: a. testosterone or other androgens given to biological females in amounts that are larger or more potent than would normally occur naturally in healt hy biologic al sex females , and b. estrogen given to biological males in amounts that are larger or more potent than would normally occur naturally in healthy biological sex males; 3. “Gender” means the psychological , behavioral, social, and cultural aspe cts of being male or female; 4. “Gender reassignment surgery ” means any medical or surgic al service that seeks to surgically alter or remove healthy physical or anatomical characteristics or features that are typical for the individual ’s biological sex, i n order to i nstill or create physiologi cal or anatomical characteristics that resemble a s ex different from the individual ’s biological sex, including but not limited to genital or nongenital gender reassignment surge ry Req. No. 3 Page 3  performed for the purpose of assisti ng an indivi dual with a gender transiti on; 5. “Gender transition ” means the process in wh ich a person goes from identifying with and living as a gender that corresponds to his or her biological sex to identifying wit h and living as a gender different from his or her biological sex, and may inv olve social, legal, or physical changes; 6. a. “Gender transition procedures ” means any medical or surgical service, including but not limited to physician ’s services, inpatient and outpatient hospital services, or pr escribed dru gs related to gender tran sition that seeks to: (1) alter or remove physica l or anatomical characteristics or features that are typical for the individual ’s biological sex, or (2) instill or create physiological or anatomical characteristics tha t resemble a sex different from the i ndividual ’s biological sex, including but not lim ited to medical services that provide puberty-blocking drugs, cross -sex hormones, or other mechanisms to promote the development of feminizing or masculinizing features i n the opposite biological sex, or gen ital or nongenital gender reassignment surgery pe rformed for the Req. No. 3 Page 4  purpose of assisting an individual with a gender transition. b. Gender transition procedures do not include: (1) services to persons born with a medically verifiable disorder of sex developme nt, including a person with external biological s ex characteristics that are irresolvably ambiguous, such as those born with 46 XX chromosomes with virilization, 46 XY chromosomes with undervirilization, or having both ovarian and testicular tissue, (2) services provided when a physician has otherwise diagnosed a disorder of sexual development that the physician has determined through genetic or biochemical testing that the person does not have normal sex chromosome stru cture, sex s teroid hormone production , or sex steroid hormone action, (3) the treatmen t of any infection, injury, disease, or disorder that has been caused by or exacerbated by the performance of gender transition procedures, whether or not the gender transition proce dure was performed in acc ordance with state and federal law, or Req. No. 3 Page 5  (4) any procedure undertaken because the individual suffers from a physical disorder, physical injury, or physical illness that would, as certified by a physician, place the indivi dual in imminent danger of death or i mpairment of major bodily function unless surgery is performed; 7. “Genital gender reassignment surgery ” means a medical procedure performed for the purpose of assisting an individual with a gender transition, includin g but not li mited to: a. surgical pro cedures such as penectomy, orchiectomy, vaginopl asty, clitoroplasty, or vulvoplasty for biologically male patients or hysterectomy or oophorectomy for biologically female patients, b. reconstruction of the fixed part of the urethra with or without a metoid ioplasty, or c. phalloplasty, vaginectomy, scroto plasty, or implantation of erection or testicular prostheses for biologically female patients; 8. “Healthcare professional ” means a person who is licensed, certified, or otherwise a uthorized by the laws of this state to administer health care in the ordin ary course of the practice of his or her profession; Req. No. 3 Page 6  9. “Nongenital gender reassignment surgery ” means medical procedures performed for the purpose of assisting an indiv idual with a gender transition includ ing but not limited to: a. surgical procedures fo r biologically male patients, such as augmentation mammoplasty, facial feminization surgery, liposuction, lipofilling, voice surgery, thyroid cartilage reduction, gluteal augmentatio n, hair reconstruction, o r various aesthetic procedures, or b. surgical pr ocedures for biologically female patients, such as subcutaneous mastectomy, voice surgery, liposuction, lipofilling, pectoral implants, or various aesthetic procedures; 10. “Physician” means a person who is licensed to practice medicine in this state; 11. “Puberty-blocking drugs ” means gonadotropin -releasing hormone analogues or other synthetic drugs used in biological males to stop luteinizing hormone secretion and ther efore testos terone secretion, or synt hetic drugs used in biological females which stop the production of estrogens and progesterone, when used to delay or suppress pubertal development in children for the purpose of assisting an individual with a gender tr ansition; an d 12. “Public funds ” means state, county, or local government monies, in addition to any department, agency, or instrumentality Req. No. 3 Page 7  authorized or appropriated under state law or derived from any fund in which such moneys are deposited. SECTION 3. NEW LAW A new section of law to be codified in the Oklahoma Stat utes as Section 2607. 3 of Title 63, unless there is created a duplication in numbering, reads as follows: A. A physician or other healthcare professional shall not provide gender transition procedures to any individual under twenty- six (26) years of age. B. A physician or other healthcare professional shall not refer any individual under twenty-six (26) years of age to any healthcare professional for gender transition procedures. C. A physician or other healthcare professional is not prohibited from prov iding any of the following procedures which are not gender transition procedures to an individual under twenty-six (26) years of age: 1. Services to persons born with a medically verifiable disorder of se x development, including a person with exter nal biological sex characteristics that are irresolvably ambiguous, such as those born with 46 XX chromosomes with virilization, 46 XY chromosomes with undervirilization, or h aving both o varian and testicular tis sue; 2. Services provided when a physician has otherwise diagnosed a disorder of sexual development that the physician has determined through genetic or biochemical testing that the person does not have Req. No. 3 Page 8  normal sex chro mosome struc ture, sex steroid hormone production, or sex steroid hormone action; 3. The treatment of any infection, injury, disease, or disorder that has been caused by or exacerbated by the performance of gender transition procedures, whether or not the gender trans ition procedure was perfo rmed in accordance with state and federal la w or whether or not funding for the gender transition procedure is permissible under Section 4 of this act; or 4. Any procedure undertaken because the individual suffers from a physical dis order, physical injury , or physical illness that would, as certified by a physician, place the individual in imminent danger of death or impairment of major bodily function unless surgery is performed. SECTION 4. NEW LAW A new secti on of law to be codifi ed in the Oklahoma Statutes as Section 2607.4 of Title 63, unless there is created a duplication in numbering, reads as follows: A. Public funds shall not be directly or indirectly used, granted, paid, or distributed to a ny entity, o rganization, or individual that provides gender transition pr ocedures to an individual under twenty-six (26) years of age. B. Healthcare services furnished in the following situations shall not include gender transition procedures to an indivi dual under twenty-six (26) years of age: Req. No. 3 Page 9  1. By or in a healthcare facility o wned by the state or a county or local government; or 2. By a physician or other healthcare professional employed by the state or a county or local government. C. The state Medicaid program shall not reimburse o r provide coverage for gender transition procedures to an indi vidual under twenty-six (26) years of age. SECTION 5. NEW LAW A new section of law to be codified in the Oklahoma Statutes as Section 26 07.5 of Title 63, unless there is created a duplication in numbering, reads as follow s: A. 1. A physician or other healthcare professional found to have knowingly referred for or provided gender transition procedures to an individual under twenty-six (26) years of age shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a felony. 2. Prosecution for a criminal violation of this subsection must be commenced within forty (40) years after t he commission of such offense. B. 1. Any referral for or provision of gender transiti on procedures to an individual u nder twenty-six (26) years of age is unprofessional conduct and shall , upon an adverse ruling by the appropriate licensing board, result in immediate revocation of the license or certificate of the physician or othe r healthcare professional . Req. No. 3 Page 10  2. Disc iplinary proceedings against the physician or other healthcare professional must be commenced within forty (40) years after the commission of such offens e. C. 1. A person may assert a n actual or threatened violation of this act as a claim or defense in a j udicial or administrative proceeding and obtain compens atory damages, injunctive relief, declaratory relief, or any other appropriate relief. 2. A person shall bring a claim for a vi olation of this act no later than forty (40) years after the day the cause of action accrues. 3. An individual under eighteen ( 18) years of age may bring an action throughout their minority through a parent or next friend , and may bring an action in their o wn name upon reaching majority at any time from that point until forty (40) years after reaching the age of majority. 4. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, an action under this subsection may be commenced, and relief may be granted, in a judicial proceeding without regard to whether the person commencing the action h as sought or exhausted available administrative remedies. 5. In any action or proceeding to enforce a provision of this act, a prevailing party who establishes a violation of this act shall recover reasonable attorney fe es. Req. No. 3 Page 11  D. 1. The Attorney General ma y bring an action to enforce compliance with this act. 2. This act does not deny, impair, or otherwise affect any right or authority of the Attorney General, this state , or any agency, officer, or employee of the state, acting under any law other than this act, to institute or intervene in any proceeding. SECTION 6. It being immediately necessary for the pr eservation of the public peace, health or safety, an emergency is hereby declared to exis t, by reason whereof this act shall ta ke effect and be in full force from and after i ts passage and approval. 59-1-3 DC 1/4/2023 11:25:39 AM 23102088D SENATE BILL NO. 911 Offered January 11, 2023 Prefiled January 5, 2023 A BILL to amend the Code of Virginia by adding sections numbered 22.1-271.9 and 23.1-408.2, relating to K-12 schools and institutions of higher education; interscholastic, intercollegiate, intramural, and club athletic teams and sports; participation on teams based on biological sex; certain requirements; civil cause of action. ---------- Patron-- Cosgrove ---------- Referred to Committee on Education and Health ---------- Be it enacted by the General Assembly of Virginia: 1. That the Code of Virginia is amended by adding sections numbered 22.1-271.9 and 23.1-408.2 as follows: §22.1-271.9. Interscholastic, intramural, and club athletic teams and sports; student participation; requirements. A. For the purposes of this section, "biological sex" means the statement of such student's biological sex on the student's official birth certificate if the statement was filed at or near the time of the student's birth. B. Each interscholastic, intramural, or club athletic team or sport sponsored by a public elementary or secondary school shall be expressly designated as one of the following based on biological sex: 1. For "males," "men," or "boys"; 2. For "females," "women," or "girls"; or 3. For "coed" or "mixed" if participation is open to both (i) males, men, or boys and (ii) females, women, or girls. C. No interscholastic, intramural, or club athletic team or sport that is sponsored by a public elementary or secondary school and that is expressly designated for "males," "men," or "boys" pursuant to subsection B shall be open to any student whose biological sex at birth is female unless such school does not sponsor an equivalent team or sport that is expressly designated for "females," "women," or "girls" or as "coed" or "mixed." D. No interscholastic, intramural, or club athletic team or sport that is sponsored by a public elementary or secondary school and that is expressly designated for "females," "women," or "girls" pursuant to subsection B shall be open to any student whose biological sex at birth is male. E. No interscholastic, intramural, or club athletic team or sport that is sponsored by a public elementary or secondary school shall compete against any interscholastic, intramural, or club athletic team or sport that is sponsored by any private elementary or secondary school unless such private school complies with the applicable provisions of this section, mutatis mutandis. F. Any student who (i) is deprived of an athletic opportunity or suffers any direct or indirect harm as a result of a school knowingly violating any provision of this section or (ii) is subject to retaliation or another adverse action by a school or athletic association or organization as a result of reporting a violation of any provision of this section to an employee or representative of a school or athletic association or organization, or to any state or federal agency with oversight of schools in the Commonwealth, shall have a cause of action against the school or athletic association or organization, provided that such cause of action is initiated within two years of such deprivation, harm, retaliation, or adverse action. G. Any public elementary or secondary school that suffers any direct or indirect harm as a result of a violation of any provision of this section by any governmental entity, licensing or accrediting organization, or athletic association or organization may initiate a cause of action against such entity, organization, or association, provided that such cause of action is initiated within two years of such harm. §23.1-408.2. Intercollegiate, intramural, and club athletic teams and sports; student participation; requirements. A. For the purposes of this section, "biological sex" means the statement of such student's biological sex on the student's official birth certificate if the statement was filed at or near the time of the student's birth. B. Each intercollegiate, intramural, or club athletic team or sport that is sponsored by a public institution of higher education shall be expressly designated as one of the following based on biological sex: 1. For "males," "men," or "boys"; 2. For "females," "women," or "girls"; or 3. For "coed" or "mixed" if participation is open to both (i) males, men, or boys and (ii) females, women, or girls. C. No intercollegiate, intramural, or club athletic team or sport that is sponsored by a public institution of higher education and that is expressly designated for "males," "men," or "boys" pursuant to subsection B shall be open to any student whose biological sex at birth is female unless such institution does not sponsor an equivalent team or sport that is expressly designated for "females," "women," or "girls" or as "coed" or "mixed." D. No intercollegiate, intramural, or club athletic team or sport that is sponsored by a public institution of higher education and that is expressly designated for "females," "women," or "girls" pursuant to subsection B shall be open to any student whose biological sex at birth is male. E. No intercollegiate, intramural, or club athletic team or sport that is sponsored by a public institution of higher education shall compete against any intercollegiate, intramural, or club athletic team or sport that is sponsored by any private institution of higher education unless such private institution of higher education complies with the applicable provisions of this section, mutatis mutandis. F. Any student who (i) is deprived of an athletic opportunity or suffers any direct or indirect harm as a result of a school knowingly violating any provision of this section or (ii) is subject to retaliation or another adverse action by a public institution of higher education or athletic association or organization as a result of reporting a violation of any provision of this section to an employee or representative of the institution or athletic association or organization, or to any state or federal agency with oversight over public institutions of higher education in the Commonwealth, shall have a cause of action against the institution or athletic association or organization, provided that such cause of action is initiated within two years of such deprivation, harm, retaliation, or adverse action. G. Any public institution of higher education that suffers any direct or indirect harm as a result of a violation of any provision of this section by any governmental entity, licensing or accrediting organization, or athletic association or organization may initiate a cause of action against such entity, organization, or association, provided that such cause of action is initiated within two years of such harm. MISSISSIPPI LEGISLATURE 2023 Regular Session To: Judiciary, Division A; Education By: Senator(s) Hill Senate Bill 2076 AN ACT TO ENACT THE TITLE IX PRESERVATION ACT; TO PROVIDE INTERPRETATION AND CLARIFICATION OF CERTAIN TERMS RELATING TO TITLE IX OF THE FEDERAL CODE; TO STATE LEGISLATIVE INTENT; TO CLARIFY TERMS FOR THE PURPOSES OF STATE LAW; TO PROVIDE THAT POLICIES AND LAWS THAT DISTINGUISH BETWEEN THE SEXES ARE SUBJECT TO INTERMEDIATE CONSTITUTIONAL SCRUTINY; TO REQUIRE THE STATE OR A LOCAL GOVERNMENTAL ENTITY TO DISAGGREGATE THE DATA OF INDIVIDUALS BY SEX BASED ON THE BIOLOGICAL SEX OF INDIVIDUALS AT BIRTH WHEN THE STATE OR LOCAL GOVERNMENTAL ENTITY GATHERS THE DATA OF INDIVIDUALS THAT IS DISAGGREGATED BY SEX; AND FOR RELATED PURPOSES. BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF MISSISSIPPI: SECTION 1. This act shall be known and may be cited as "The Title IX Preservation Act." SECTION 2. The Legislature finds and declares that: (a) Males and females possess unique and immutable biological differences that manifest prior to birth and increase with age and puberty; (b) Biological differences between the sexes mean that only females can get pregnant, give birth and breastfeed children; (c) Biological differences between the sexes mean that males are, on average, larger in size and possess greater body strength than females; (d) Whereas biological differences between the sexes can expose females to greater harm than males from specific forms of violence, including sexual violence; (e) Females have historically suffered from discrimination in education, athletics and employment; (f) Females have achieved inspirational and significant accomplishments in education, athletics and employment; Biological differences between the sexes are enduring and may, in some circumstances, warrant the creation of separate social, educational, athletic or other spaces in order to ensure safety and/or to allow members of each sex to succeed and thrive; (g) When it comes to sex: (i) "Equal" does not mean "same" or "identical"; and (ii) Separate is not inherently unequal; and (h) Recent misguided court rulings and policy initiatives relating to the definition of "sex" have led to the endangerment of single-sex spaces and resources dedicated to women, thereby necessitating clarification of certain terms. SECTION 3. For the purposes of State law: (a) The "sex" of an individual means his or her biological sex (either male or female) at birth. (b) The terms "woman" and "girl" refer to human females. (c) The terms "man" and "boy" refer to human males. (d) The word "mother" refers to a parent of the female sex. (e) The word "father" refers to a parent of the male sex. SECTION 4. (1) There are important reasons to distinguish between the sexes with respect to athletics, prisons, domestic violence shelters, restrooms, and with respect to other areas, particularly where biology, safety and privacy are implicated. (2) Policies and laws that distinguish between the sexes are subject to intermediate constitutional scrutiny and permitted when they serve an important governmental objective and are substantially related to achieving that objective. SECTION 5. When the State or a local governmental entity gathers data of individuals that is disaggregated by sex, the state or local governmental entity shall disaggregate the data of individuals by sex based on the biological sex of individuals at birth. SECTION 6. Any person who suffers any direct or indirect harm as a result of a violation of this act shall have a private cause of action for injunctive relief, damages and any other relief available under law against the state or its political subdivision causing the harm. SECTION 7. This act shall take effect and be in force from and after July 1, 2023. AN ACT Relating to enacting the protecting children's bodies act; 1 amending RCW 48.43.0128 and 74.09.675 ; adding a new section to 2 chapter 43.70 RCW ; creating a new section; and prescribing penalties. 3 BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF WASHINGTON: 4 NEW SECTION. Sec. 1. A new section is added to chapter 43.70 5 RCW to read as follows: 6 (1) A health care provider may not provide gender transition 7 procedures to any individual who is under 18 years of age. A health 8 care provider may not refer any individual who is under 18 years of 9 age to any health care provider for gender transition procedures. A 10 health care provider is not prohibited from providing any of the 11 following procedures that are not gender transition procedures to an 12 individual who is under 18 years of age: 13 (a) Services to persons born with a medically verifiable disorder 14 of sex development, including a person with external biological sex 15 characteristics that are irresolvably ambiguous, such as being born 16 with 46 xx chromosomes with virilization or 46 xy chromosomes with 17 undervirilization or having both ovarian and testicular tissue; 18 (b) Services provided when a physician has otherwise diagnosed a 19 disorder of sexual development and has determined through genetic or 20 biochemical testing that the person does not have normal sex 21H-0367.2 HOUSE BILL 1214 State of Washington 68th Legislature 2023 Regular Session By Representative Walsh p. 1 HB 1214chromosome structure, sex steroid hormone production, or sex steroid 1 hormone action; 2 (c) The treatment of any infection, injury, disease, or disorder 3 that has been caused by or exacerbated by the performance of gender 4 transition procedures, whether or not the gender transition procedure 5 was performed in accordance with state and federal law or whether or 6 not funding for the gender transition procedure is allowable under 7 this section; and 8 (d) Any procedure undertaken because the individual suffers from 9 a physical disorder, physical injury, or physical illness that would, 10 as certified by a physician, place the individual in imminent danger 11 of death or impairment of major bodily function unless surgery is 12 performed. 13 (2) Public funds may not be directly or indirectly used, granted, 14 paid, or distributed to any entity, organization, or individual that 15 provides gender transition procedures to an individual who is under 16 18 years of age. Health care services furnished in the following 17 situations may not include gender transition procedures to an 18 individual who is under 18 years of age: 19 (a) By or in a health care facility owned by this state or a 20 county or local government; and 21 (b) By a health care provider employed by the state or a county 22 or local government. 23 (3) Any referral for or provision of gender transition procedures 24 to an individual who is under 18 years of age is unprofessional 25 conduct and is subject to discipline by the appropriate disciplining 26 authority. 27 (4) A person may assert an actual or threatened violation of this 28 section as a claim or defense in a judicial or administrative 29 proceeding and obtain compensatory damages, injunctive relief, 30 declaratory relief, or any other appropriate relief. A person must 31 bring a claim for a violation of this section no later than two years 32 after the day the cause of action accrues. An individual who is under 33 18 years of age may bring an action throughout the individual's 34 minority through a parent or next friend and may bring an action in 35 the individual's own name on reaching 18 years of age until 20 years 36 after reaching 18 years of age. 37 (5) Notwithstanding any other law, an action under this section 38 may be commenced, and relief may be granted, in a judicial proceeding 39 without regard to whether the person commencing the action has sought 40 p. 2 HB 1214or exhausted available administrative remedies. In any action or 1 proceeding to enforce this section, a prevailing party who 2 establishes a violation of this section shall recover reasonable 3 attorney fees. 4 (6) The attorney general may bring an action to enforce 5 compliance with this section. This section does not deny, impair, or 6 otherwise affect any right or authority of the attorney general, this 7 state, or any agency, officer, or employee of this state, acting 8 under any law other than this section, to institute or intervene in 9 any proceeding. 10 (7) A violation of this section is a class C felony. 11 (8) For the purposes of this section: 12 (a) "Biological sex" means the biological indication of male and 13 female in the context of reproductive potential or capacity, such as 14 sex chromosomes, naturally occurring sex hormones, gonads and 15 nonambiguous internal and external genitalia present at birth, 16 without regard to an individual's psychological, chosen, or 17 subjective experience of gender. 18 (b) "Cross-sex hormones" means either of the following: 19 (i) Testosterone or other androgens given to biological females 20 in amounts that are larger or more potent than would normally occur 21 naturally in healthy biological sex females; or 22 (ii) Estrogen given to biological males in amounts that are 23 larger or more potent than would normally occur naturally in healthy 24 biological sex males. 25 (c) "Gender" means the psychological, behavioral, social, and 26 cultural aspects of being male or female. 27 (d) "Gender reassignment surgery" means any medical or surgical 28 service that seeks to surgically alter or remove healthy physical or 29 anatomical characteristics or features that are typical for an 30 individual's biological sex in order to instill or create 31 physiological or anatomical characteristics that resemble a sex 32 different from the individual's biological sex. "Gender reassignment 33 surgery" includes genital or nongenital gender reassignment surgery 34 performed for the purpose of assisting an individual with a gender 35 transition. 36 (e) "Gender transition" means the process in which a person goes 37 from identifying with and living as a gender that corresponds to the 38 person's biological sex to identifying with and living as a gender 39 p. 3 HB 1214different from the person's biological sex and may involve social, 1 legal, or physical changes. 2 (f) "Gender transition procedures": 3 (i) Means any medical or surgical service, including physician 4 services, inpatient and outpatient hospital services, or prescribed 5 drugs related to gender transition, that seeks to either: 6 (A) Alter or remove physical or anatomical characteristics or 7 features that are typical for the individual's biological sex; or 8 (B) Instill or create physiological or anatomical characteristics 9 that resemble a sex different from the individual's biological sex, 10 including medical services that provide puberty-blocking drugs, 11 cross-sex hormones, or other mechanisms to promote the development of 12 feminizing or masculinizing features in the opposite biological sex 13 or genital or nongenital gender reassignment surgery performed for 14 the purpose of assisting an individual with a gender transition. 15 (ii) Does not include any of the following: 16 (A) Services to persons born with a medically verifiable disorder 17 of sex development, including a person with external biological sex 18 characteristics that are irresolvably ambiguous, such as being born 19 with 46 xx chromosomes with virilization or 46 xy chromosomes with 20 undervirilization or having both ovarian and testicular tissue; 21 (B) Services provided when a physician has otherwise diagnosed a 22 disorder of sexual development and has determined through genetic or 23 biochemical testing that the person does not have normal sex 24 chromosome structure, sex steroid hormone production, or sex steroid 25 hormone action; 26 (C) The treatment of any infection, injury, disease, or disorder 27 that has been caused by or exacerbated by the performance of gender 28 transition procedures, whether or not the gender transition procedure 29 was performed in accordance with state and federal law or whether or 30 not funding for the gender transition procedure is allowable under 31 this section; and 32 (D) Any procedure undertaken because the individual suffers from 33 a physical disorder, physical injury, or physical illness that would, 34 as certified by a physician, place the individual in imminent danger 35 of death or impairment of major bodily function unless surgery is 36 performed. 37 (g) "Genital gender reassignment surgery" means a medical 38 procedure performed for the purpose of assisting an individual with a 39 gender transition, including any of the following: 40 p. 4 HB 1214(i) Surgical procedures such as penectomy, orchiectomy, 1 vaginoplasty, clitoroplasty, or vulvoplasty for biologically male 2 patients or hysterectomy or ovariectomy for biologically female 3 patients; 4 (ii) Reconstruction of the fixed part of the urethra with or 5 without a metoidioplasty; 6 (iii) Phalloplasty, vaginectomy, scrotoplasty, or implantation of 7 erection or testicular prostheses for biologically female patients; 8 and 9 (iv) Removing any healthy or nondiseased body part. 10 (h) "Health care provider" means a person regulated under Title 11 18 RCW to practice health or health-related services or otherwise 12 practicing health care services in this state consistent with state 13 law. 14 (i) "Nongenital gender reassignment surgery" means medical 15 procedures performed for the purpose of assisting an individual with 16 a gender transition, including either of the following: 17 (i) Surgical procedures for biologically male patients, such as 18 augmentation mammoplasty, facial feminization surgery, liposuction, 19 lipofilling, voice surgery, thyroid cartilage reduction, gluteal 20 augmentation, hair reconstruction, or various aesthetic procedures; 21 and 22 (ii) Surgical procedures for biologically female patients, such 23 as subcutaneous mastectomy, voice surgery, liposuction, lipofilling, 24 pectoral implants, or various aesthetic procedures. 25 (j) "Puberty-blocking drugs" means gonadotropin-releasing hormone 26 analogues or other synthetic drugs used in biological males to stop 27 luteinizing hormone secretion and testosterone secretion, or 28 synthetic drugs used in biological females which stop the production 29 of estrogens and progesterone, when used to delay or suppress 30 pubertal development in children for the purpose of assisting an 31 individual with a gender transition. 32 (k) "Public funds" means state, county, or local government 33 moneys, in addition to any department, agency, or instrumentality 34 authorized or appropriated under state law or derived from any fund 35 in which such moneys are deposited. 36 Sec. 2. RCW 48.43.0128 and 2021 c 280 s 3 are each amended to 37 read as follows: 38 p. 5 HB 1214(1) A health carrier offering a nongrandfathered health plan or a 1 plan deemed by the commissioner to have a short-term limited purpose 2 or duration, or to be a student-only plan that is guaranteed 3 renewable while the covered person is enrolled as a regular, full- 4 time undergraduate student at an accredited higher education 5 institution may not: 6 (a) In its benefit design or implementation of its benefit 7 design, discriminate against individuals because of their age, 8 expected length of life, present or predicted disability, degree of 9 medical dependency, quality of life, or other health conditions; and 10 (b) With respect to the health plan or plan deemed by the 11 commissioner to have a short-term limited purpose or duration, or to 12 be a student-only plan that is guaranteed renewable while the covered 13 person is enrolled as a regular, full-time undergraduate student at 14 an accredited higher education institution, discriminate on the basis 15 of race, color, national origin, disability, age, sex, gender 16 identity, or sexual orientation. 17 (2) Nothing in this section may be construed to prevent a carrier 18 from appropriately utilizing reasonable medical management 19 techniques. 20 (3) ((For)) Except as provided in subsection (9) of this section, 21 for health plans issued or renewed on or after January 1, 2022: 22 (a) A health carrier may not deny or limit coverage for gender 23 affirming treatment when that treatment is prescribed to an 24 individual because of, related to, or consistent with a person's 25 gender expression or identity, as defined in RCW 49.60.040 , is 26 medically necessary, and is prescribed in accordance with accepted 27 standards of care. 28 (b) A health carrier may not apply categorical cosmetic or 29 blanket exclusions to gender affirming treatment. When prescribed as 30 medically necessary gender affirming treatment, a health carrier may 31 not exclude as cosmetic services facial feminization surgeries and 32 other facial gender affirming treatment, such as tracheal shaves, 33 hair electrolysis, and other care such as mastectomies, breast 34 reductions, breast implants, or any combination of gender affirming 35 procedures, including revisions to prior treatment. 36 (c) A health carrier may not issue an adverse benefit 37 determination denying or limiting access to gender affirming 38 services, unless a health care provider with experience prescribing 39 p. 6 HB 1214or delivering gender affirming treatment has reviewed and confirmed 1 the appropriateness of the adverse benefit determination. 2 (d) Health carriers must comply with all network access rules and 3 requirements established by the commissioner. 4 (4) For the purposes of this section, "gender affirming 5 treatment" means a service or product that a health care provider, as 6 defined in RCW 70.02.010 , prescribes to an individual to treat any 7 condition related to the individual's gender identity and is 8 prescribed in accordance with generally accepted standards of care. 9 Gender affirming treatment must be covered in a manner compliant with 10 the federal mental health parity and addiction equity act of 2008 and 11 the federal affordable care act. Gender affirming treatment can be 12 prescribed to two spirit, transgender, nonbinary, intersex, and other 13 gender diverse individuals. 14 (5) Nothing in this section may be construed to mandate coverage 15 of a service that is not medically necessary. 16 (6) By December 1, 2022, the commissioner, in consultation with 17 the health care authority and the department of health, must issue a 18 report on geographic access to gender affirming treatment across the 19 state. The report must include the number of gender affirming 20 providers offering care in each county, the carriers and medicaid 21 managed care organizations those providers have active contracts 22 with, and the types of services provided by each provider in each 23 region. The commissioner must update the report biannually and post 24 the report on its website. 25 (7) The commissioner shall adopt any rules necessary to implement 26 subsections (3), (4), and (5) of this section. 27 (8) Unless preempted by federal law, the commissioner shall adopt 28 any rules necessary to implement subsections (1) and (2) of this 29 section, consistent with federal rules and guidance in effect on 30 January 1, 2017, implementing the patient protection and affordable 31 care act. 32 (9) A health carrier may not reimburse or provide coverage for 33 gender affirming treatment to an individual who is under 18 years of 34 age. 35 Sec. 3. RCW 74.09.675 and 2021 c 280 s 4 are each amended to 36 read as follows: 37 (1) ((In)) Except as provided in subsection (6) of this section, 38 in the provision of gender affirming care services through programs 39 p. 7 HB 1214under this chapter, the authority, managed care plans, and providers 1 that administer or deliver such services may not discriminate in the 2 delivery of a service provided through a program of the authority 3 based on the covered person's gender identity or expression. 4 (2) ((Beginning )) Except as provided in subsection (6) of this 5 section, beginning January 1, 2022: 6 (a) The authority and any managed care plans delivering or 7 administering services purchased or contracted for by the authority 8 may not apply categorical cosmetic or blanket exclusions to gender 9 affirming treatment. 10 (b) Facial feminization surgeries and facial gender affirming 11 treatment, such as tracheal shaves, hair electrolysis, and other care 12 such as mastectomies, breast reductions, breast implants, or any 13 combination of gender affirming procedures, including revisions to 14 prior treatment, when prescribed as gender affirming treatment, may 15 not be excluded as cosmetic. 16 (c) The authority and managed care plans administering services 17 purchased or contracted for by the authority may not issue an adverse 18 benefit determination denying or limiting access to gender affirming 19 treatment, unless a health care provider with experience prescribing 20 or delivering gender affirming treatment has reviewed and confirmed 21 the appropriateness of the adverse benefit determination. 22 (d) If the authority and managed care plans administering 23 services purchased or contracted for by the authority do not have an 24 adequate network for gender affirming treatment, they shall ensure 25 the delivery of timely and geographically accessible medically 26 necessary gender affirming treatment at no greater expense than if 27 they had an in-network, geographically accessible provider available. 28 This includes, but is not limited to, providing case management 29 services to secure out-of-network gender affirming treatment options 30 that are available to the enrollee in a timely manner within their 31 geographic region. The enrollee shall pay no more than the same cost 32 sharing that the enrollee would pay for the same covered services 33 received from an in-network provider. 34 (3) For the purposes of this section, "gender affirming 35 treatment" means a service or product that a health care provider, as 36 defined in RCW 70.02.010 , prescribes to an individual to support and 37 affirm the individual's gender identity. Gender affirming treatment 38 includes, but is not limited to, treatment for gender dysphoria. 39 p. 8 HB 1214Gender affirming treatment can be prescribed to two spirit, 1 transgender, nonbinary, and other gender diverse individuals. 2 (4) Nothing in this section may be construed to mandate coverage 3 of a service that is not medically necessary. 4 (5) The authority shall adopt rules necessary to implement this 5 section. 6 (6) The authority and managed care plans administering services 7 purchased or contracted for by the authority may not reimburse or 8 provide coverage for gender affirming treatment to an individual who 9 is under 18 years of age. 10 NEW SECTION. Sec. 4. This act may be known and cited as the 11 protecting children's bodies act. 12 --- END --- p. 9 HB 1214 Introduced Version HOUSE BILL No. 1231 _____ DIGEST OF INTRODUCED B ILL Citations Affected: IC 12-15-1-23; IC 16-18-2; IC 16-35-12; IC 27-2-28; IC 34-18-1-1. Synopsis: Gender transition procedures for minors. Prohibits specified health care professionals from providing gender transition procedures to a minor that are intended to alter the gender of the minor or delay puberty. Provides for certain medical exceptions. Prohibits public funds, Medicaid, or a health carrier from providing reimbursement or coverage for gender transition procedur es to a minor. Creates a civil cause of action. Makes conforming changes. Effective: July 1, 2023. Lauer January 10, 2023, read first time and referred to Commi ttee on Public Health. 2023 IN 1231—LS 7276/DI 147 Introduced First Reg ular Sessio n of the 123rd General A ssem bly (2023) PRINTING CODE. Amendments: Whenever an existing statute (or a section of the Indiana Constitution) is being amended, the text of the existing provision will appear in this style type, additions will appear in this sty le type, and deletions will appear in this style type. Additions: Whenever a new statutory provision is being enacted (or a new constitutional provision adopted), the text of the new provision will appear in this style type. Also, the word NEW will appear in that style type in the introductory clause of each SECTION that adds a new provision to the Indiana Code or the Indiana Constitution. Conflict reconciliation: Text in a statute in this style type or this style type reconciles conflicts between statutes enacted by the 2022 Regular Session of the General Assembly. HOUSE BILL No. 1231 A BILL FOR AN ACT to amend the Indiana Code concerning health. Be it enacted by the General Assembly of the State of Indiana: 1 SECTION 1. IC 12-15-1-23 IS ADDED TO THE INDIANA CODE 2 AS A NEW SECTION TO READ AS FOLLOWS [EFFECTIVE JULY 3 1, 2023]: Sec. 23. The office may not use federal or state funds 4 under the Medicaid program to pay or provide coverage for 5 gender transition procedures (as defined by IC 16-35-12-6) to an 6 individual who is less than eighteen (18) years of age. 7 SECTION 2. IC 16-18-2-36.1 IS ADDED TO THE INDIANA 8 CODE AS A NEW SECTION TO READ AS FOLLOWS 9 [EFFECTIVE JULY 1, 2023]: Sec. 36.1. "Biological sex", for 10 purposes of IC 16-35-12, has the meaning set forth in 11 IC 16-35-12-1. 12 SECTION 3. IC 16-18-2-88.7 IS ADDED TO THE INDIANA 13 CODE AS A NEW SECTION TO READ AS FOLLOWS 14 [EFFECTIVE JULY 1, 2023]: Sec. 88.7. "Cross sex hormones", for 15 purposes of IC 16-35-12, has the meaning set forth in 16 IC 16-35-12-2. 17 SECTION 4. IC 16-18-2-144.2 IS ADDED TO THE INDIANA 2023 IN 1231—LS 7276/DI 147 2 1 CODE AS A NEW SECTION TO READ AS FOLLOWS 2 [EFFECTIVE JULY 1, 2023]: Sec. 144.2. "Gender", for purposes of 3 IC 16-35-12, has the meaning set forth in IC 16-35-12-3. 4 SECTION 5. IC 16-18-2-144.3 IS ADDED TO THE INDIANA 5 CODE AS A NEW SECTION TO READ AS FOLLOWS 6 [EFFECTIVE JULY 1, 2023]: Sec. 144.3. "Gender reassignment 7 surgery", for purposes of IC 16-35-12, has the meaning set forth in 8 IC 16-35-12-4. 9 SECTION 6. IC 16-18-2-144.4 IS ADDED TO THE INDIANA 10 CODE AS A NEW SECTION TO READ AS FOLLOWS 11 [EFFECTIVE JULY 1, 2023]: Sec. 144.4. "Gender transition", for 12 purposes of IC 16-35-12, has the meaning set forth in 13 IC 16-35-12-5. 14 SECTION 7. IC 16-18-2-144.5 IS ADDED TO THE INDIANA 15 CODE AS A NEW SECTION TO READ AS FOLLOWS 16 [EFFECTIVE JULY 1, 2023]: Sec. 144.5. "Gender transition 17 procedures", for purposes of IC 16-35-12, has the meaning set 18 forth in IC 16-35-12-6. 19 SECTION 8. IC 16-18-2-148.2 IS ADDED TO THE INDIANA 20 CODE AS A NEW SECTION TO READ AS FOLLOWS 21 [EFFECTIVE JULY 1, 2023]: Sec. 148.2. "Genital gender 22 reassignment surgery", for purposes of IC 16-35-12, has the 23 meaning set forth in IC 16-35-12-7. 24 SECTION 9. IC 16-18-2-157.2 IS ADDED TO THE INDIANA 25 CODE AS A NEW SECTION TO READ AS FOLLOWS 26 [EFFECTIVE JULY 1, 2023]: Sec. 157.2. "Harm", for purposes of 27 IC 16-35-12, has the meaning set forth in IC 16-35-12-8. 28 SECTION 10. IC 16-18-2-162, AS AMENDED BY P.L.212-2005, 29 SECTION 5, IS AMENDED TO READ AS FOLLOWS [EFFECTIVE 30 JULY 1, 2023]: Sec. 162. (a) "Health care professional", for purposes 31 of IC 16-27-1 and IC 16-27-4, has the meaning set forth in 32 IC 16-27-1-1. 33 (b) "Health care professional", for purposes of IC 16-27-2, has the 34 meaning set forth in IC 16-27-2-1. 35 (c) "Health care professional", for purposes of IC 16-35-12, has 36 the meaning set forth in IC 16-35-12-9. 37 SECTION 11. IC 16-18-2-250.5 IS ADDED TO THE INDIANA 38 CODE AS A NEW SECTION TO READ AS FOLLOWS 39 [EFFECTIVE JULY 1, 2023]: Sec. 250.5. "Nongenital gender 40 reassignment surgery", for purposes of IC 16-35-12, has the 41 meaning set forth in IC 16-35-12-11. 42 SECTION 12. IC 16-18-2-296.7 IS ADDED TO THE INDIANA 2023 IN 1231—LS 7276/DI 147 3 1 CODE AS A NEW SECTION TO READ AS FOLLOWS 2 [EFFECTIVE JULY 1, 2023]: Sec. 296.7. "Puberty blocking drugs", 3 for purposes of IC 16-35-12, has the meaning set forth in 4 IC 16-35-12-12. 5 SECTION 13. IC 16-18-2-297.2 IS ADDED TO THE INDIANA 6 CODE AS A NEW SECTION TO READ AS FOLLOWS 7 [EFFECTIVE JULY 1, 2023]: Sec. 297.2. "Public funds", for 8 purposes of IC 16-35-12, has the meaning set forth in 9 IC 16-35-12-13. 10 SECTION 14. IC 16-35-12 IS ADDED TO THE INDIANA CODE 11 AS A NEW CHAPTER TO READ AS FOLLOWS [EFFECTIVE 12 JULY 1, 2023]: 13 Chapter 12. Gender Transition Procedures for Minors 14 Sec. 1. As used in this chapter, "biological sex" means the 15 biological indication of male and female in the context of 16 reproductive potential or capacity, including sex chromosomes, 17 naturally occurring sex hormones, gonads, and nonambiguous 18 internal and external genitalia present at birth, without regard to 19 an individual's psychological, chosen, or subjective experience of 20 gender. 21 Sec. 2. As used in this chapter, "cross sex hormones" means the 22 following: 23 (1) Testosterone or other androgens given to biological sex 24 females in amounts that are larger or more potent than would 25 normally occur naturally in healthy biological sex females. 26 (2) Estrogen given to biological sex males in amounts that are 27 larger or more potent than would normally occur naturally in 28 healthy biological sex males. 29 Sec. 3. As used in this chapter, "gender" means the 30 psychological, behavioral, social, and cultural aspects of being male 31 or female. 32 Sec. 4. As used in this chapter, "gender reassignment surgery" 33 means any medical or surgical service that seeks to surgically alter 34 or remove healthy physical or anatomical characteristics or 35 features that are typical for the individual's biological sex, in order 36 to instill or create physiological or anatomical characteristics that 37 resemble a sex different from the individual's biological sex, 38 including genital gender reassignment surgery or nongenital 39 gender reassignment surgery performed for the purpose of 40 assisting an individual with a gender transition. 41 Sec. 5. As used in this chapter, "gender transition" means the 42 process in which an individual shifts from identifying with and 2023 IN 1231—LS 7276/DI 147 4 1 living as a gender that corresponds to his or her biological sex to 2 identifying with and living as a gender different from his or her 3 biological sex, and may involve social, legal, or physical changes. 4 Sec. 6. (a) As used in this chapter, "gender transition 5 procedures" means any medical or surgical service, including 6 physician's services, inpatient and outpatient hospital services, or 7 prescribed drugs related to gender transition that seeks to: 8 (1) alter or remove physical or anatomical characteristics or 9 features that are typical for the individual's biological sex; or 10 (2) instill or create physiological or anatomical characteristics 11 that resemble a sex different from the individual's biological 12 sex, including medical services that provide puberty blocking 13 drugs, cross sex hormones, or other mechanisms to promote 14 the development of feminizing or masculinizing features in the 15 opposite biological sex, or genital gender reassignment 16 surgery or nongenital gender reassignment surgery 17 performed for the purpose of assisting an individual with a 18 gender transition. 19 (b) The term does not include the following: 20 (1) Services to an individual born with a medically verifiable 21 disorder of sex development, including an individual with: 22 (A) external biological sex characteristics that are 23 irresolvably ambiguous; 24 (B) forty-six (46) XX chromosomes with virilization; 25 (C) forty-six (46) XY chromosomes with undervirilization; 26 or 27 (D) both ovarian and testicular tissue. 28 (2) Services provided when a physician has diagnosed a 29 disorder of sexual development that the physician has 30 determined through genetic or biochemical testing that the 31 individual does not have normal sex chromosome structure, 32 sex steroid hormone production, or sex steroid hormone 33 action. 34 (3) The treatment of any infection, injury, disease, or disorder 35 that has been caused by or exacerbated by the performance of 36 gender transition procedures. 37 (4) Any procedure undertaken because the individual suffers 38 from a physical disorder, physical injury, or physical illness 39 that would, as certified by a physician, place the individual in 40 imminent danger of death or impairment of major bodily 41 function unless surgery is performed. 42 Sec. 7. As used in this chapter, "genital gender reassignment 2023 IN 1231—LS 7276/DI 147 5 1 surgery" means a medical procedure performed for the purpose of 2 assisting an individual with a gender transition, including the 3 following: 4 (1) Surgical procedures, including a penectomy, orchiectomy, 5 vaginoplasty, clitoroplasty, or vulvoplasty for biological sex 6 male patients or hysterectomy or ovariectomy for biological 7 sex female patients. 8 (2) Reconstruction of the fixed part of the urethra with or 9 without a metoidioplasty. 10 (3) Phalloplasty, vaginectomy, scrotoplasty, or implantation 11 of erection or testicular prostheses for biological sex female 12 patients. 13 Sec. 8. As used in this chapter, "harm" includes the following: 14 (1) Physical injury. 15 (2) Psychological harm or impairment. 16 (3) Emotional distress. 17 Sec. 9. As used in this chapter, "health care professional" refers 18 to the following: 19 (1) A physician licensed under IC 25-22.5. 20 (2) A nurse, including an advanced practice registered nurse, 21 licensed under IC 25-23. 22 (3) Any of the behavioral health or human services 23 professionals licensed under IC 25-23.6. 24 (4) A physician assistant licensed under IC 25-27.5. 25 (5) A psychologist licensed under IC 25-33. 26 Sec. 10. As used in this chapter, "minor" means an individual 27 who is less than eighteen (18) years of age. 28 Sec. 11. As used in this chapter, "nongenital gender 29 reassignment surgery" means medical procedures performed for 30 the purpose of assisting an individual with a gender transition, 31 including the following: 32 (1) Surgical procedures for biological sex male patients, 33 including augmentation mammoplasty, facial feminization 34 surgery, liposuction, lipofilling, voice surgery, thyroid 35 cartilage reduction, gluteal augmentation, hair 36 reconstruction, or associated aesthetic procedures. 37 (2) Surgical procedures for biological sex female patients, 38 including subcutaneous mastectomy, voice surgery, 39 liposuction, lipofilling, pectoral implants, or associated 40 aesthetic procedures. 41 Sec. 12. As used in this chapter, "puberty blocking drugs" 42 means: 2023 IN 1231—LS 7276/DI 147 6 1 (1) gonadotropin releasing hormone analogs or other 2 synthetic drugs used in biological sex males to stop luteinizing 3 hormone secretion and testosterone secretion; or 4 (2) synthetic drugs used in biological sex females that stop the 5 production of estrogens and progesterone; 6 when used to delay or suppress pubertal development in a minor 7 for the purpose of assisting an individual with a gender transition. 8 Sec. 13. As used in this chapter, "public funds" means state, 9 county, or local government funds, in addition to any department, 10 agency, or instrumentality authorized or appropriated funds under 11 state law or derived from any fund in which the funds are 12 deposited. 13 Sec. 14. (a) Except as provided in subsection (c), a health care 14 professional may not provide gender transition procedures to a 15 minor. 16 (b) Except as provided in subsection (c), a health care 17 professional may not refer a minor to any practitioner for gender 18 transition procedures. 19 (c) This section does not prohibit a health care professional from 20 providing any of the following procedures to a minor: 21 (1) Services to individuals born with a medically verifiable 22 disorder of sex development, including individuals having: 23 (A) both ovarian and testicular tissue; or 24 (B) external biological characteristics that are ambiguous 25 resulting from having a 46,XX karyotype with virilization 26 or 46,XY karyotype with undervirilization. 27 (2) Services provided to a minor who has an abnormal sex 28 chromosome structure that has been diagnosed using genetic 29 testing by a physician licensed under IC 25-22.5. 30 (3) The treatment of any infection, injury, disease, or disorder 31 that has been caused by or exacerbated by the performance of 32 gender transition procedures. 33 (4) Any procedure undertaken because the individual suffers 34 from a physical disorder, physical injury, or physical illness 35 that would, as certified by a physician, place the individual in 36 imminent danger of death or impairment of major bodily 37 function unless surgery is performed. 38 Sec. 15. Public funds may not be directly or indirectly used, 39 granted, paid, or distributed to any entity, organization, or 40 individual that provides gender transition procedures to a minor. 41 Sec. 16. Health care services furnished in the following 42 situations may not include gender transition procedures to a 2023 IN 1231—LS 7276/DI 147 7 1 minor: 2 (1) By or in a health care facility owned by the state, a county, 3 or a municipality. 4 (2) By a physician or other practitioner employed by state, 5 county, or local government. 6 Sec. 17. (a) An individual, or the individual's parent or guardian 7 if the individual is a minor, who suffers harm as a result of a 8 gender transition procedure provided in violation of this chapter 9 may bring a cause of action against the health care professional 10 who provided the procedure. 11 (b) An action described in subsection (a) must be commenced 12 not later than fifteen (15) years after the individual becomes 13 eighteen (18) years of age. 14 (c) A court may award reasonable attorney's fees, litigation 15 expenses, and costs to a person who prevails in an action under 16 subsection (a). 17 SECTION 15. IC 27-2-28 IS ADDED TO THE INDIANA CODE 18 AS A NEW CHAPTER TO READ AS FOLLOWS [EFFECTIVE 19 JULY 1, 2023]: 20 Chapter 28. Gender Transition Procedures 21 Sec. 1. As used in this chapter, "coverage" means the right of an 22 individual to receive: 23 (1) health care services; or 24 (2) payment or reimbursement for health care services; 25 from a health carrier. 26 Sec. 2. As used in this section, "gender transition procedures" 27 has the meaning set forth in IC 16-35-12-6. 28 Sec. 3. (a) As used in this chapter, "health carrier" means an 29 entity: 30 (1) that is subject to this title and the administrative rules 31 adopted under this title; and 32 (2) that enters into a contract to: 33 (A) provide health care services; 34 (B) deliver health care services; 35 (C) arrange for health care services; or 36 (D) pay for or reimburse any of the costs of health care 37 services. 38 (b) The term includes the following: 39 (1) An insurer, as defined in IC 27-1-2-3(x), that issues a 40 policy of accident and sickness insurance, as defined in 41 IC 27-8-5-1(a). 42 (2) A health maintenance organization, as defined in 2023 IN 1231—LS 7276/DI 147 8 1 IC 27-13-1-19. 2 (3) An administrator (as defined in IC 27-1-25-1(a)) that is 3 licensed under IC 27-1-25. 4 (4) A state employee health plan offered under IC 5-10-8. 5 (5) A short term insurance plan (as defined by IC 27-8-5.9-3). 6 (6) Any other entity that provides a plan of health insurance, 7 health benefits, or health care services. 8 (c) The term does not include: 9 (1) an insurer that issues a policy of accident and sickness 10 insurance; 11 (2) a limited service health maintenance organization (as 12 defined in IC 27-13-34-4); or 13 (3) an administrator; 14 that only provides coverage for, or processes claims for, dental or 15 vision care services. 16 Sec. 4. (a) A health plan may not include coverage or 17 reimbursement for gender transition procedures for an individual 18 who is less than eighteen (18) years of age. 19 (b) A health plan is not required to provide coverage for gender 20 transition procedures. 21 SECTION 16. IC 34-18-1-1 IS AMENDED TO READ AS 22 FOLLOWS [EFFECTIVE JULY 1, 2023]: Sec. 1. This article does not 23 apply to: 24 (1) an act of malpractice that occurred before July 1, 1975; or 25 (2) an action brought under IC 16-35-12 (gender transition 26 procedures for minors). 2023 IN 1231—LS 7276/DI 147 Introduced Version HOUSE BILL No. 1232 _____ DIGEST OF INTRODUCED B ILL Citations Affected: IC 31-33-8-12; IC 31-34-2. Synopsis: Child removal and gender identity. Provides that the department of child services may not classify a report of child abuse or neglect as substantiated, and a child may not be removed from the child's parent, guardian, or custodian, solely on the basis of the parent, guardian, or custodian: (1) referring to and raising the child consistent with the child's biological sex; or (2) declining to consent to the child receiving: (A) specified medication; (B) a medical procedure the purpose of which is to alter the apparent gender or sex of the child or affirm the child's perception of the child's gender or sex in a manner inconsistent with the child's biological sex; or (C) counseling or other mental health services the purpose of which is to affirm the child's perception of the child's gender or sex if the child's perception is inconsistent with the child's biological sex. Effective: July 1, 2023. Lauer January 10, 2023, read first time and referred to Commi ttee on Family, Children and Human Affairs. 2023 IN 1232—LS 7337/DI 119 Introduced First Reg ular Sessio n of the 123rd General A ssem bly (2023) PRINTING CODE. Amendments: Whenever an existing statute (or a section of the Indiana Constitution) is being amended, the text of the existing provision will appear in this style type, additions will appear in this sty le type, and deletions will appear in this style type. Additions: Whenever a new statutory provision is being enacted (or a new constitutional provision adopted), the text of the new provision will appear in this style type. Also, the word NEW will appear in that style type in the introductory clause of each SECTION that adds a new provision to the Indiana Code or the Indiana Constitution. Conflict reconciliation: Text in a statute in this style type or this style type reconciles conflicts between statutes enacted by the 2022 Regular Session of the General Assembly. HOUSE BILL No. 1232 A BILL FOR AN ACT to amend the Indiana Code concerning family law and juvenile law. Be it enacted by the General Assembly of the State of Indiana: 1 SECTION 1. IC 31-33-8-12, AS AMENDED BY P.L.131-2009, 2 SECTION 50, IS AMENDED TO READ AS FOLLOWS [EFFECTIVE 3 JULY 1, 2023]: Sec. 12. (a) Upon completion of an assessment, the 4 department shall classify reports as substantiated or unsubstantiated. 5 (b) The department may not classify a report as substantiated 6 solely on the basis of a finding under the assessment of the child's 7 parent, guardian, or custodian: 8 (1) referring to and raising the child consistent with the 9 child's biological sex; 10 (2) declining to consent to the child receiving: 11 (A) puberty blocking medication; 12 (B) supraphysiologic doses of testosterone or estrogen; or 13 (C) any surgical procedure the purpose of which is to: 14 (i) alter the apparent gender or sex of the child in a 15 manner inconsistent with the child's biological sex; or 16 (ii) affirm the child's perception of the child's gender or 17 sex, if the child's perception is inconsistent with the 2023 IN 1232—LS 7337/DI 119 2 1 child's biological sex; or 2 (3) declining to consent to the child receiving counseling or 3 other mental health services for the purpose of affirming the 4 child's perception of the child's gender or sex, if the child's 5 perception is inconsistent with the child's biological sex. 6 SECTION 2. IC 31-34-2-1 IS AMENDED TO READ AS 7 FOLLOWS [EFFECTIVE JULY 1, 2023]: Sec. 1. (a) A child may be 8 taken into custody by a law enforcement officer under an order of the 9 court. 10 (b) A court may not order a child to be taken into custody solely 11 as a result of the child's parent, guardian, or custodian: 12 (1) referring to and raising the child consistent with the 13 child's biological sex; 14 (2) declining to consent to the child receiving: 15 (A) puberty blocking medication; 16 (B) supraphysiologic doses of testosterone or estrogen; or 17 (C) any surgical procedure the purpose of which is to: 18 (i) alter the apparent gender or sex of the child in a 19 manner inconsistent with the child's biological sex; or 20 (ii) affirm the child's perception of the child's gender or 21 sex, if the child's perception is inconsistent with the 22 child's biological sex; or 23 (3) declining to consent to the child receiving counseling or 24 other mental health services for the purpose of affirming the 25 child's perception of the child's gender or sex, if the child's 26 perception is inconsistent with the child's biological sex. 27 SECTION 3. IC 31-34-2-3 IS AMENDED TO READ AS 28 FOLLOWS [EFFECTIVE JULY 1, 2023]: Sec. 3. (a) If a law 29 enforcement officer's action under section 2 of this chapter will not 30 adequately protect the safety of the child, the child may be taken into 31 custody by a law enforcement officer, probation officer, or caseworker 32 acting with probable cause to believe the child is a child in need of 33 services if: 34 (1) it appears that the child's physical or mental condition will be 35 seriously impaired or seriously endangered if the child is not 36 immediately taken into custody; 37 (2) there is not a reasonable opportunity to obtain an order of the 38 court; and 39 (3) consideration for the safety of the child precludes the 40 immediate use of family services to prevent removal of the child. 41 (b) A probation officer or caseworker may take a child into custody 42 only if the circumstances make it impracticable to obtain assistance 2023 IN 1232—LS 7337/DI 119 3 1 from a law enforcement officer. 2 (c) A child may not be taken into custody under this section 3 solely as a result of the child's parent, guardian, or custodian: 4 (1) referring to and raising the child consistent with the 5 child's biological sex; 6 (2) declining to consent to the child receiving: 7 (A) puberty blocking medication; 8 (B) supraphysiologic doses of testosterone or estrogen; or 9 (C) any surgical procedure the purpose of which is to: 10 (i) alter the apparent gender or sex of the child in a 11 manner inconsistent with the child's biological sex; or 12 (ii) affirm the child's perception of the child's gender or 13 sex, if the child's perception is inconsistent with the 14 child's biological sex; or 15 (3) declining to consent to the child receiving counseling or 16 other mental health services for the purpose of affirming the 17 child's perception of the child's gender or sex, if the child's 18 perception is inconsistent with the child's biological sex. 19 (c) (d) If a person takes a child into custody under this section, the 20 person shall make written documentation not more than twenty-four 21 (24) hours after the child is taken into custody as provided in section 22 6 of this chapter. 2023 IN 1232—LS 7337/DI 119 23103055D SENATE BILL NO. 1203 Offered January 11, 2023 Prefiled January 10, 2023 A BILL to amend the Code of Virginia by adding in Title 32.1 a chapter numbered 21, consisting of sections numbered 32.1-376 through 32.1-379, and by adding a section numbered 38.2-3449.2, relating to establishment of the Children Deserve Help Not Harm Act; health benefit plans; coverage for gender transition procedures. ---------- Patron-- Reeves ---------- Referred to Committee on Education and Health ---------- Be it enacted by the General Assembly of Virginia: 1. That the Code of Virginia is amended by adding in Title 32.1 a chapter numbered 21, consisting of sections numbered 32.1-376 through 32.1-379, and by adding a section numbered 38.2-3449.2 as follows: CHAPTER 21. CHILDREN DESERVE HELP NOT HARM ACT. §32.1-376. Definitions. As used in this chapter, unless the context requires a different meaning: "Biological sex" means the biological indication of male and female in the context of reproductive potential or capacity, such as sex chromosomes, naturally occurring sex hormones, gonads, and nonambiguous internal and external genitalia present at birth, without regard to an individual's psychological, chosen, or subjective experience of gender. "Cross-sex hormones" means: 1. Testosterone or other androgens given to biological females in amounts that are larger or more potent than would normally occur naturally in healthy biological sex females; and 2. Estrogen given to biological males in amounts that are larger or more potent than would normally occur naturally in healthy biological sex males. "Gender" means the psychological, behavioral, social, and cultural aspects of being male or female. "Gender reassignment surgery" means any medical or surgical service that seeks to surgically alter or remove healthy physical or anatomical characteristics or features that are typical for the individual's biological sex in order to instill or create physiological or anatomical characteristics that resemble a sex different from the individual's biological sex, including without limitation genital or nongenital gender reassignment surgery performed for the purpose of assisting an individual with a gender transition. "Gender transition" means the process in which an individual goes from identifying with and living as a gender that corresponds to the individual's biological sex to identifying with and living as a gender different from his or her biological sex, which process may involve social, legal, or physical changes. "Gender transition procedure" means any medical or surgical service, including without limitation physician's services, inpatient and outpatient hospital services, or prescribed drugs related to gender transition, that seeks to: 1. Alter or remove physical or anatomical characteristics or features that are typical for an individual's biological sex; or 2. Instill or create physiological or anatomical characteristics that resemble a sex different from an individual's biological sex, including without limitation (i) medical services that provide puberty-blocking drugs, cross-sex hormones, or other mechanisms to promote the development of feminizing or masculinizing features in the opposite biological sex or (ii) genital or nongenital gender reassignment surgery performed for the purpose of assisting an individual with a gender transition. "Gender transition procedure" does not include: 1. Services to individuals born with a medically verifiable disorder of sex development, including an individual with external biological sex characteristics that are irresolvably ambiguous, such as a person born with 46, XX karotype with virilization, with 46, XY karotype with undervirilization, or having both ovarian and testicular tissue; 2. Services provided when a physician has otherwise diagnosed a disorder of sexual development or the physician has determined through genetic or biochemical testing that an individual does not have normal sex chromosome structure, sex steroid hormone production, or sex steroid hormone action; 3. The treatment of any infection, injury, disease, or disorder that has been caused by or exacerbated by the performance of gender transition procedures, whether or not the gender transition procedure was performed in accordance with state and federal law or whether or not funding for the gender transition procedure is permissible under this chapter; or 4. Any procedure undertaken because the individual suffers from a physical disorder, physical injury, or physical illness that would, as certified by a physician, place the individual in imminent danger of death or impairment of major bodily function unless surgery is performed. "Genital gender reassignment surgery" means a medical procedure performed for the purpose of assisting an individual with a gender transition, including without limitation: 1. Surgical procedures such as penectomy, orchiectomy, vaginoplasty, clitoroplasty, or vulvoplasty for biologically male patients or hysterectomy or oophorectomy for biologically female patients; 2. Reconstruction of the fixed part of the urethra with or without a metoidioplasty; or 3. Phalloplasty, vaginectomy, scrotoplasty, or implantation of erection or testicular prostheses for biologically female patients. "Health care professional" means an individual who is licensed, certified, or otherwise authorized by the laws of the Commonwealth to administer health care in the ordinary course of the practice of his profession. "Nongenital gender reassignment surgery" means medical procedures performed for the purpose of assisting an individual with a gender transition, including without limitation: 1. Surgical procedures for biologically male patients such as augmentation mammoplasty, facial feminization surgery, liposuction, lipofilling, voice surgery, thyroid cartilage reduction, gluteal augmentation, hair reconstruction, or various aesthetic procedures; or 2. Surgical procedures for biologically female patients such as subcutaneous mastectomy, voice surgery, liposuction, lipofilling, pectoral implants, or various aesthetic procedures. "Physician" means a person who is licensed to practice medicine in the Commonwealth. "Puberty-blocking drugs" means gonadotropin-releasing hormone analogues or other synthetic drugs used in biological males to stop luteinizing hormone secretion and therefore testosterone secretion, or synthetic drugs used in biological females which stop the production of estrogens and progesterone, when used to delay or suppress pubertal development in minors for the purpose of assisting an individual with a gender transition. "Public funds" means state, county, or local government moneys, in addition to any department, agency, or instrumentality moneys authorized or appropriated under state law or derived from any fund in which such moneys are deposited. §32.1-377. Prohibition of gender transition procedures for minors. A. A physician or other health care professional shall not provide gender transition procedures to any individual younger than 18 years of age. B. A physician or other health care professional shall not refer any individual younger than 18 years of age to any health care professional for gender transition procedures. C. A physician or other health care professional may provide any of the following procedures that are not gender transition procedures to an individual younger than 18 years of age: 1. Services to individuals born with a medically verifiable disorder of sex development, including an individual with external biological sex characteristics that are irresolvably ambiguous, such as those born with 46,XX karotype with virilization, with 46,XY karotype with undervirilization, or having both ovarian and testicular tissue; 2. Services provided when a physician has otherwise diagnosed a disorder of sexual development or the physician has determined through genetic or biochemical testing that the person does not have normal sex chromosome structure, sex steroid hormone production, or sex steroid hormone action; 3. The treatment of any infection, injury, disease, or disorder that has been caused by or exacerbated by the performance of gender transition procedures, whether or not the gender transition procedure was performed in accordance with state and federal law or whether or not funding for the gender transition procedure is permissible under this chapter; or 4. Any procedure undertaken because the individual suffers from a physical disorder, physical injury, or physical illness that would, as certified by a physician, place the individual in imminent danger of death or impairment of major bodily function unless surgery is performed. §32.1-378. Prohibition on use of public funds for gender transition procedures. A. Public funds shall not be directly or indirectly used, granted, paid, or distributed to any entity, organization, or individual that provides gender transition procedures to an individual younger than 18 years of age. B. Health care services furnished in the following situations shall not include gender transition procedures to an individual younger than 18 years of age: 1. By or in a health care facility owned by the state or a county or local government; or 2. By a physician or other health care professional who is an employee of the Commonwealth. C. Any amount paid by an individual or an entity during a taxable year for provision of gender transition procedures or as premiums for health care coverage that includes coverage for gender transition procedures is not tax-deductible. D. The State Plan for Medical Assistance Services shall not reimburse or provide coverage for gender transition procedures to an individual younger than 18 years of age. §32.1-379. Enforcement. A. Any referral for or provision of gender transition procedures to an individual younger than 18 years of age is unprofessional conduct and is subject to discipline by the appropriate licensing entity or disciplinary review board with competent jurisdiction in the Commonwealth. B. An individual may assert an actual or threatened violation of this chapter as a claim or defense in a judicial or administrative proceeding and obtain compensatory damages, injunctive relief, declaratory relief, or any other appropriate relief. C. An individual shall bring a claim for a violation of this chapter no later than two years after the date the cause of action accrues. D. An individual younger than 18 years of age may bring an action under this chapter throughout the individual's minority through a parent or next friend and may bring an action in his own name upon reaching majority at any time from that point until 20 years after reaching 18 years of age. E. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, an action under this chapter may be commenced, and relief may be granted, in a judicial proceeding without regard to whether the individual commencing the action has sought or exhausted available administrative remedies. F. In any action or proceeding to enforce a provision of this chapter, a prevailing party who establishes a violation of this chapter shall recover reasonable attorney fees. G. The Attorney General may bring an action to enforce compliance with this chapter. H. This chapter does not deny, impair, or otherwise affect any right or authority of the Attorney General, the Commonwealth, or any agency, officer, or employee of the state, acting under any law other than this chapter, to institute or intervene in any proceeding. §38.2-3449.2. Insurance coverage of gender transition procedures for minors prohibited. A. As used in this section, "gender transition procedure" means the same as defined in § 32.1-376. B. Notwithstanding the provisions of §38.2-3449.1, no health carrier shall (i) provide coverage for any gender transition procedure for any individual younger than 18 years of age or (ii) be required to provide coverage for any gender transition procedure for any individual 18 years of age or older. HB 619-FN - AS INTRODUCED 2023 SESSION 23-0071 02/05 HOUSE BILL 619-FN AN ACT prohibiting gender transition procedures for minors, relative to sex and gender in public schools, and relative to the definition of conversion therapy. SPONSORS: Rep. Roy, Rock. 31; Rep. Spillane, Rock. 2; Rep. McCarter, Belk. 8; Rep. Verville, Rock. 2; Rep. Notter, Hills. 12; Rep. Seidel, Hills. 29; Rep. A. Lekas, Hills. 38; Rep. Love, Rock. 13 COMMITTEE: Health, Human Services and Elderly Affairs ----------------------------------------------------------------- ANALYSIS This bill prohibits gender transition care for minors under 18 years of age, prohibits teaching about gender identity in public schools and changes the definition of conversion therapy. - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Explanation: Matter added to current law appears in bold italics. Matter removed from current law appears [in brackets and struckthrough.] Matter which is either (a) all new or (b) repealed and reenacted appears in regular type. 23-0071 02/05 STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE In the Year of Our Lord Two Thousand Twenty Three AN ACT prohibiting gender transition procedures for minors, relative to sex and gender in public schools, and relative to the definition of conversion therapy. Be it Enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives in General Court convened: 1 Title. This act shall be known and may be cited as the "Protection Against Child Medical and Psychological Experimentation Act". 2 Legislative Findings. The general court finds that: I. New Hampshire has a compelling government interest in protecting the health and safety of its citizens, especially vulnerable children; II.(a) Only a small percentage of the American population experiences distress at identifying with their biological sex. (b) According to the American Psychiatric Association, “For natal adult males, prevalence ranges from 0.005 to 0.014 percent, and for natal females, from 0.002 to 0.003 percent.”; III. For the small percentage of children who are gender nonconforming or experience distress at identifying with their biological sex, studies consistently demonstrate that the majority come to identify with their biological sex in adolescence or adulthood, thereby rendering most physiological interventions unnecessary; IV. Furthermore, scientific studies show that individuals struggling with distress at identifying with their biological sex often have already experienced psychopathology, which indicates these individuals should be encouraged to seek mental health services to address comorbidities and underlying causes of their distress before undertaking any hormonal or surgical intervention; V. Even among people who have undergone inpatient gender reassignment procedures, suicide rates, psychiatric morbidities, and mortality rates remain markedly elevated above the background population; VI.(a) Some health care providers are prescribing puberty blocking drugs, such as gonadotropin-releasing hormone analogues, in order to delay the onset or progression of puberty in children who experience distress at identifying with their biological sex. (b) The prescribing of puberty-blocking drugs is being done despite the lack of any long-term longitudinal studies evaluating the risks and benefits of using these drugs for the treatment of such distress or gender transition; VII. Health care providers are also prescribing cross-sex hormones for children who experience distress at identifying with their biological sex, despite the fact that no randomized clinical trials have been conducted on the efficacy or safety of the use of cross-sex hormones in adults or children for the purpose of treating such distress or gender transition; VIII. The use of cross-sex hormones comes with serious known risks, such as: (a) For biological females: (1) Erythrocytosis, which is an increase in red blood cells; (2) Severe liver dysfunction; (3) Coronary artery disease, including heart attacks; (4) Cerebrovascular disease, including strokes; (5) Hypertension; (6) Increased risk of breast and uterine cancers; and (7) Irreversible infertility; and (b) For biological males: (1) Thromboembolic disease, including blood clots; (2) Cholelithiasis, including gallstones; (3) Coronary artery disease, including heart attacks; (4) Macroprolactinoma, which is a tumor of the pituitary gland; (5) Cerebrovascular disease, including strokes; (6) Hypertriglyceridemia, which is an elevated level of triglycerides in the blood; (7) Breast cancer; and (8) Irreversible infertility; IX. Genital and non-genital gender reassignment surgeries are generally not recommended for children, although evidence indicates referrals for children to have such surgeries are becoming more frequent; X.(a) Genital gender reassignment surgery includes several irreversible invasive procedures for males and females and involves the alteration of biologically healthy and functional body parts. (b) For biological males, surgery may involve: (1) Genital reconstruction including penectomy, which is the removal of the penis; (2) Orchiectomy, which is the removal of the testicles; (3) Vaginoplasty, which is the construction of a vagina-like structure, typically through a penile inversion procedure; (4) Clitoroplasty, which is the construction of a clitoris-like structure; and (5) Vulvoplasty, which is the construction of a vulva-like structure. (c) For biological females, surgery may involve: (1) A hysterectomy or oophorectomy; (2) Reconstruction of the urethra; (3) Genital reconstruction including metoidioplasty or phalloplasty, which is the construction of a penis-like structure; (4) Vaginectomy, which is the removal of the vagina; (5) Scrotoplasty, which is the construction of a penis-like and scrotum-like structure; and (6) Implantation of erection or testicular prostheses; XI. The complications, risks, and long-term care concerns associated with genital gender reassignment surgery for both males and females are numerous and complex; XII.(a) Non-genital gender reassignment surgery includes various invasive procedures for males and females and also involves the alteration or removal of biologically normal and functional body parts. (b) For biological males, this surgery may involve: (1) Augmentation mammoplasty; (2) Facial feminization surgery; (3) Liposuction; (4) Lipofilling; (5) Voice surgery; (6) Thyroid cartilage reduction; (7) Gluteal augmentation; (8) Hair reconstruction; and (9) Other aesthetic procedures. (c) For biological females, this surgery may involve: (1) A subcutaneous mastectomy; (2) Voice surgery; (3) Liposuction; (4) Lipofilling; (5) Pectoral implants; and (6) Other aesthetic procedures; XIII.(a) It is an accepted principle of economics and public policy that when a service or product is subsidized or reimbursed, demand for that service or product is increased. (b) Between 2015 and 2016, gender reassignment surgeries increased by nearly twenty percent in the United States; XIV. It is of grave concern to the general court that the medical community is allowing individuals who experience distress at identifying with their biological sex to be subjects of irreversible and drastic non-genital gender reassignment surgery and irreversible, permanently sterilizing genital gender reassignment surgery, despite the lack of studies showing that the benefits of such extreme interventions outweigh the risks; and XV. The risks of gender transition procedures far outweigh any benefit at this stage of clinical study on these procedures. 3 New Chapter; System of Gender Dysphoria Care for Minors. Amend RSA by inserting after chapter 135-F the following new chapter:CHAPTER 135-GSYSTEM OF GENDER DYSPHORIA CARE FOR MINORS 135-G:1 Definitions. In this chapter: I. "Biological sex” means the biological indication of male and female in the context of reproductive potential or capacity, such as sex chromosomes, naturally occurring sex hormones, gonads, and non-ambiguous internal and external genitalia present at birth, without regard to an individual’s psychological, chosen, or subjective experience of gender. II. “Cross-sex hormones” means: (a) Testosterone or other androgens given to biological females in amounts that are larger or more potent than would normally occur naturally in healthy biological sex females; and (b) Estrogen given to biological males in amounts that are larger or more potent than would normally occur naturally in healthy biological sex males. III. “Gender” means the psychological, behavioral, social, and cultural aspects of being male or female. IV. “Gender reassignment surgery” means any medical or surgical service that seeks to surgically alter or remove healthy physical or anatomical characteristics or features that are typical for the individual’s biological sex, in order to instill or create physiological or anatomical characteristics that resemble a sex different from the individual’s biological sex, including without limitation, genital or nongenital gender reassignment surgery performed for the purpose of assisting an individual with a gender transition. V. “Gender transition” means the process in which a person goes from identifying with and living as a gender that corresponds to his or her biological sex to identifying with and living as a gender different from his or her biological sex, and may involve social, legal, or physical changes. VI.(a) “Gender transition procedures” means any medical or surgical service, including without limitation physician's services, inpatient and outpatient hospital services, or prescribed drugs related to gender transition that seeks to: (1) Alter or remove physical or anatomical characteristics or features that are typical for the individual’s biological sex; or (2) Instill or create physiological or anatomical characteristics that resemble a sex different from the individual’s biological sex, including without limitation medical services that provide puberty blocking drugs, cross-sex hormones, or other mechanisms to promote the development of feminizing or masculinizing features in the opposite biological sex, or genital or non-genital gender reassignment surgery performed for the purpose of assisting an individual with a gender transition. (b) “Gender transition procedures” do not include: (1) Services to persons born with a medically verifiable disorder of sex development, including a person with external biological sex characteristics that are ambiguous, such as those born with 46 XX chromosomes with virilization, 46 XY chromosomes with undervirilization, or having both ovarian and testicular tissue; (2) Services provided when a physician has otherwise diagnosed a disorder of sexual development that the physician has determined through genetic or biochemical testing that the person does not have normal sex chromosome structure, sex steroid hormone production, or sex steroid hormone action; (3) The treatment of any infection, injury, disease, or disorder that has been caused by or exacerbated by the performance of gender transition procedures, whether or not the gender transition procedure was performed in accordance with state and federal law or whether not funding for the gender transition procedure is permissible under this chapter; or (4) Any procedure undertaken because the individual suffers from a physical disorder, physical injury, or physical illness that would, as certified by a physician, place the individual in imminent danger of death or impairment of major bodily function unless surgery is performed. VII. “Genital gender reassignment surgery” means a medical procedure performed for the purpose of assisting an individual with a gender transition, including without limitation: (a) Surgical procedures such as penectomy, orchiectomy, vaginoplasty, clitoroplasty, or vulvoplasty for biologically male patients or hysterectomy or ovariectomy for biologically female patients; (b) Reconstruction of the fixed part of the urethra with or without a metoidioplasty; or (c) Phalloplasty, vaginectomy, scrotoplasty, or implantation of erection or testicular prostheses for biologically female patients. VIII. “Health care professional” a person who is licensed, certified, or otherwise authorized by the laws of this state to administer health care in the ordinary course of the practice of his or her profession. IX. “Non-genital gender reassignment surgery” means medical procedures performed for the purpose of assisting an individual with a gender transition including without limitation: (a) Surgical procedures for biologically male patients, such as augmentation mammoplasty, facial feminization surgery, liposuction, lipofilling, voice surgery, thyroid cartilage reduction, gluteal augmentation, hair reconstruction, or various aesthetic procedures; or (b) Surgical procedures for biologically female patients, such as subcutaneous mastectomy, voice surgery, liposuction, lipofilling, pectoral implants, or various aesthetic procedures. X. “Physician” means a person who is licensed to practice medicine in this state. XI. “Puberty-blocking drugs” means gonadotropin-releasing hormone analogues or other synthetic drugs used in biological males to stop luteinizing hormone secretion and therefore testosterone secretion, or synthetic drugs used in biological females which stop the production of estrogens and progesterone, when used to delay or suppress pubertal development in children for the purpose of assisting an individual with a gender transition. XII. Public funds” means state, county, or local government monies, in addition to any department, agency, or instrumentality authorized or appropriated under state law or derived from any fund in which such moneys are deposited. 135-G:2 Prohibition of Gender Transition Care for Children and Young Adults. I. A physician or other health care professional shall not provide gender transition procedures to any individual under 18 years of age. II. A physician or other health care professional shall not refer any individual under 18 years of age to any health care professional for gender transition procedures. III. A physician or other health care professional is not prohibited from providing any of the following procedures which are not gender transition procedures to an individual under 18 years of age: (a) Services to persons born with a medically verifiable disorder of sex development, including a person with external biological sex characteristics that are ambiguous, such as those born with 46 XX chromosomes with virilization, 46 XY chromosomes with undervirilization, or having both ovarian and testicular tissue; (b) Services provided when a physician has otherwise diagnosed a disorder of sexual development that the physician has determined through genetic or biochemical testing that the person does not have normal sex chromosome structure, sex steroid hormone production, or sex steroid hormone action; (c) The treatment of any infection, injury, disease, or disorder that has been caused by or exacerbated by the performance of gender transition procedures, whether or not the gender transition procedure was performed in accordance with state and federal law or whether not funding for the gender transition procedure is permissible under this chapter; or (d) Any procedure undertaken because the individual suffers from a physical disorder, physical injury, or physical illness that would, as certified by a physician, place the individual in imminent danger of death or impairment of major bodily function unless surgery is performed. 135-G:3 Prohibition on Use of Public Funds for Gender Transition Care. I. Public funds shall not be directly or indirectly used, granted, paid, or distributed to any entity, organization, or individual that provides gender transition procedures to an individual under 18 years of age. II. Health care services furnished in the following situations shall not include gender transition procedures to an individual under 18 years of age: (a) By or in a health care facility owned by the state or a county or local government; or (b) By a physician or other health care professional employed by state or a county or local government. III. The New Hampshire Medicaid program shall not reimburse or provide coverage for gender transition procedures to an individual under 18 years of age. 135-G:4 Enforcement. I. Any referral for or provision of gender transition procedures to an individual under 18 years of age is unprofessional conduct and is subject to discipline by the appropriate licensing entity or disciplinary review board with competent jurisdiction in this state. II. A person may assert an actual or threatened violation of this chapter as a claim or defense in a judicial or administrative proceeding and obtain compensatory damages, injunctive relief, declaratory relief, or any other appropriate relief. III.(a) A person shall bring a claim for a violation of this chapter no later than 2 years after the day the cause of action accrues. (b) An individual under 18 years of age may bring an action during their minority through a parent or next friend, and may bring an action in their own name upon reaching majority at any time from that point until 20 years after reaching the age of majority. IV. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, an action under this chapter may be commenced, and relief may be granted, in a judicial proceeding without regard to whether the person commencing the action has sought or exhausted available administrative remedies. V. In any action or proceeding to enforce a provision of this chapter, a prevailing party who establishes a violation of this chapter shall recover reasonable attorneys’ fees. VI.(a) The attorney general shall bring action to enforce compliance with this chapter. (b) This chapter does not deny, impair, or otherwise affect any right or authority of the attorney general, the State of New Hampshire, or any agency, officer, or employee of the state, acting under any law other than this chapter, to institute or intervene in any proceeding. 135-G:5 Insurance Coverage. I. No insurer that issues or renews a policy for health insurance under RSA 415, health service corporation under RSA 420-A, or health maintenance organization under RSA 420-B shall include reimbursement for gender transition procedures for a person under 18 years of age. II. No insurer that issues or renews a policy for health insurance under RSA 415, health service corporation under RSA 420-A, or health maintenance organization under RSA 420-B shall be required to provide coverage for gender transition procedures. 4 Legislative Findings Relative to Sex and Gender in Public Schools. The general court finds that: I. Parents are the primary educators of their children. II. Parents are solely responsible for teaching their children about matters of faith, morals, and matters relating to their sexuality. III. When parents choose to send their children to a public school, they do not waive their right to be the sole educator of their children about matters of faith, morals, and matters relating to their sexuality. IV. Parents are entitled to deference in these matters and should not be contradicted by the government. V. Modesty falls within the scope of faith, moral and sexuality teachings, and parents should expect their children to be safe to express their modesty while in a public school. VI. Forcing a student to share a restroom, locker/changing room or shower with a student of the opposite sex is a direct contradiction to the concept of modesty and is a clear government interference in a parent’s right to teach their children as their faith, or personal moral code allows. VII. Teaching a student that there are more than two genders infringes on a parent’s right to be the sole educator in matters of faith, morals and sexuality, as many religious faiths teach that there are but two genders; male and female. VIII. Teaching a student that they are free to choose their own gender, name, pronoun, or sexual orientation violates a parent’s right as sole educator related to matters of faith, morals and matters relating to sexuality and is a government violation of that right. IX. There is no credible scientific evidence that a person is anything other than the gender and biological sex that they are born with and any claim to the contrary is based upon subjective, psychological, individual feelings. This area of human study is controversial and far from settled science. As such, teachings related to this complex and controversial concept are inappropriate for a pre-k through 12 public school setting. X. Biological males are physically different than biological females. Males generally, are physically stronger and as such, any physical competition between biological males and biological females is fundamentally unfair. Furthermore, such competition can result in physical injury to the female participant if contact is involved. Allowing biological males to participate in female sports is both dangerous and unfair to female athletes. This diminishes female achievement, sets back women’s rights and limits future collegiate scholarship opportunity and denies them the recognition they are due for their hard work in their sport of choice that is reserved to female athletes. 5 New Subdivision; Pupils; Sex and Gender in Public Schools. Amend RSA 193 by inserting after section 40 the following new subdivision:Sex and Gender in Public Schools 193:41 Sex and Gender in Public Schools. I. All public schools in kindergarten through grade 12 in New Hampshire shall refer to children by the name and gender that they are enrolled as. This shall apply to all verbal and written communications, records, or in any other way that the students may be referenced. Schools shall not allow the teaching of different pronouns other than those in common use in the English language when referring to the male or female. School staff shall use the appropriate pronoun for student’s gender as listed in the enrollment by their parents. Educators in grades kindergarten through 8, are prohibited from teaching that gender is a choice, optional or fluid and that there are more than 2 genders: male and female. Educators in grades 9 through 12 are prohibited from teaching that gender is a choice, optional or fluid and that there are more than 2 genders: male and female, except as a part of an approved psychology course setting where the educator is a licensed child psychologist, and they may only teach that there may be more than 2 genders in the context of teaching about the mental health condition known as gender dysphoria. Prior to any lesson, class or assignment that proposes there are more than the male and female genders, the school shall obtain written permission from the parents. The permission notice shall explain in detail the contents of the lesson, class or assignment. Parents shall have the right to opt their child out of such lesson, class or assignment, and students themselves may choose not to participate if the subject matter makes them uncomfortable. Any student’s failure to participate shall not be used in calculating their grades. No grade or incomplete status shall be noted in the student’s records for failure to participate in such lesson, class or assignment. II. In any New Hampshire public school that offers regular or extracurricular activities that are separated by gender or sex (male or female), any student participating shall only be allowed to participate in the group that corresponds to their biological sex as listed at their time of birth. No student shall be discriminated against by not being allowed to participate in such an activity based on their personally identifying as a gender other than that identified at their time of birth but they shall nonetheless only participate in the activity that corresponds to their biological sex at their time of birth. III. School restrooms shall be separated by sex (male and female), and students may only use the restroom that corresponds to their biological sex as listed on their birth certificate. IV.(a) Anyone violating a provision of this subdivision shall be considered to have violated the terms of their licensure and shall be subject to discipline by their licensing authority up to and including the revocation of their license. This shall also be considered grounds for immediate termination from employment for cause, any union or employment contract notwithstanding. (b) Any student or parent aggrieved by a violation of this section may bring a cause of action in court and may be granted actual damages as well as legal fees. (c) The attorney general, upon referral by the department of education, a parent or student, shall bring any necessary action to enjoin any ongoing violation of this section and defend any actions brought under this section. 6 Definition; Conversion Therapy. Amend RSA 332-L:1 to read as follows: 332-L:1 Definition. In this chapter, "conversion therapy" means practices or treatments that seek to change an individual's sexual orientation or gender identity against their clearly expressed will, including further efforts against their will to change behaviors or gender expressions or to eliminate or reduce sexual or romantic attractions or feelings toward individuals of the same gender. Conversion therapy shall not include counseling of a child enrolled in therapy at the request of their parent for the evaluation of, and treatment for, gender dysphoria, or that provides assistance to a person undergoing therapy for gender dysphoria and who, after reaching the age of 18, wishes to discuss gender transition from or to their biological gender, or counseling that provides a person over the age of 18 acceptance, support, and understanding of a person or facilitates a person's coping, social support, and identity exploration and development, including sexual-orientation-neutral interventions to prevent or address unlawful conduct or unsafe sexual practices, as long as such counseling does not seek to change an individual's sexual orientation or gender identity against their clearly expressed will. 7 Effective Date. This act shall take effect January 1, 2024. LBA 23-0071 1/10/23 HB 619-FN- FISCAL NOTEAS INTRODUCED AN ACT prohibiting gender transition procedures for minors, relative to sex and gender in public schools, and relative to the definition of conversion therapy. FISCAL IMPACT: [ X ] State [ ] County [ ] Local [ ] None Estimated Increase / (Decrease) STATE:FY 2023FY 2024FY 2025FY 2026 Appropriation$0$0$0$0 Revenue$0$0$0$0 Expenditures$0IndeterminableIndeterminableIndeterminable Funding Source: [ X ] General [ ] Education [ ] Highway [ ] Other The Legislative Budget Assistant Office is awaiting information from the Department of Justice. The Department was contacted for a fiscal note worksheet on January 6, 2023. METHODOLOGY:This bill prohibits gender transition procedures for individuals under the age of 18 and prohibits the use of funds for these procedures. The Department of Health and Human Services anticipates a reduction in Medicaid funds as a result of the services, therapies, and medications that would no longer be performed or offered. However, the Department also anticipates that the bill may result in an "undefined level of risk" of disallowance of federal matching funds under Medicaid, as federal law and regulations are currently unsettled on the matter of whether states may prohibit public funds from being used for gender transitions and related treatments. The Judicial Branch notes that violations of the proposed new chapter would be subject to civil proceedings in court. In addition, the bill creates a new subdivision in RSA 193 relative to sex and gender in public schools, and would entitle the attorney general to seek an action in court to enjoin any ongoing violation of the section. The Branch is unable to determine the number of new cases that may be brought as a result of the bill. The Department of Education states there is no anticipated costs to local school districts as a result of the bill. AGENCIES CONTACTED:Judicial Branch, and Departments of Health and Human Services, Education, and Justice WEST virginia legislature 2021 SECOND EXTRAORDINARY session Introduced Senate Bill 2007 By Senators Blair (Mr. President) and Baldwin (By Request of the Executive) [Introduced June 24, 2021] A BILL supplementing and amending the appropriations of public moneys out of the Treasury from the balance of moneys remaining as an unappropriated balance in the State Fund, General Revenue, to the Department of Arts, Culture, and History, Division of Culture and History, fund 0293, fiscal year 2021, organization 0432, by supplementing and amending the appropriations for the fiscal year ending June 30, 2021. Whereas, The Governor submitted to the Legislature the Executive Budget Document, dated February 10, 2021, which included a Statement of the State Fund, General Revenue, setting forth therein the cash balance as of July 1, 2020, and further included an estimate of revenues for the fiscal year 2021, less net appropriation balances forwarded and regular appropriations for the fiscal year 2021; and Whereas, The Governor submitted to the Legislature an Executive Message dated June 7, 2021, which included a revised estimate of revenues for the State Fund, General Revenue, and a Statement of the State Fund, General Revenue, for the fiscal year 2021; and Whereas, The Governor submitted to the Legislature an Executive Message dated June 24, 2021, which included a revised estimate of revenues for the State Fund, General Revenue, and a Statement of the State Fund, General Revenue, for the fiscal year 2021; and Whereas, It appears from the Statement of the State Fund, General Revenue, and Executive messages, there remains an unappropriated balance in the State Treasury which is available for appropriation during the fiscal year ending June 30, 2021; therefore Be it enacted by the Legislature of West Virginia: That the total appropriation for the fiscal year ending June 30, 2021, to fund 0293, fiscal year 2021, organization 0432, be supplemented and amended by increasing an existing item of appropriation as follows: Title II – Appropriations. Section 1. Appropriations from general revenue. department of arts, culture, and history 50 – Division of Culture and History (WV Code Chapter 29) Fund 0293 FY 2021 Org 0432 General Appro- Revenue priation Fund 12 Capital Outlay and Maintenance (R)................................... 75500................................................................................. $ 2,100,000 NOTE: The purpose of this supplemental appropriation bill is to increase an existing item of appropriation for the Department of Arts, Culture, and History, Division of Culture and History, fund 0293, fiscal year 2021, organization 0432, for the fiscal year 2021. Strike-throughs indicate language that would be stricken from a heading or the present law and underscoring indicates new language that would be added. Req. No. 778 Page 1  STATE OF OKLAHOMA 1st Session of the 59th Legislature (2023) SENATE BILL 408 By: Garvin AS INTRODUCED An Act relating to discrimination; creating the Women’s Bill of Rights; providing shor t title; stating purpose of act; clarifying applica tion and interpretation of act; amending 25 O.S. 2021, Sections 16 , 1101, and 1201, which relate to definitions and statutory construction; defining terms; construing provisions; authorizing distinctions f or certain purposes; defining term; requiring certa in identification in collection of data for certain purposes; providing for codification; providing for noncodification; and providing an effective date. BE IT ENACTED BY THE PEOPLE OF THE STAT E OF OKLAHOMA: SECTION 1. NEW L AW A new section of law not to be codified in the Oklahoma Statutes reads as follows: A. This act shall be known and may be cited as the “Women’s Bill of Rights ”. B. The purpose of The Women ’s Bill o f Rights is to bring clarity, certainty, and unifor mity under the laws of this state with respect to natural persons of both biological sexes and the manner in which they are treated as such under the la ws of this state. All laws where the application the reof is contingent upon the Req. No. 778 Page 2  classification of a per son as bein g female or male, woman or man, girl or boy, are hereby superseded and interpreted to the extent necessary by this act including but not limi ted to any educational benefits, corrections housing, employment protections, and civil rights laws codi fied in the statutes of this state. SECTION 2. AMENDATORY 25 O.S. 2021, Section 16, is amended to read as follows: Section 1 6. The word “person, ” As used in the Oklahoma Statutes : 1. “Father” means the male parent of a child or children as defined in Section 7 of this title; 2. “Female” means a natural person whose biological reproductive system is developed to produce ova; 3. “Male” means a natural person whose biological repr oductive system is developed to fertilize the ova o f a female; 4. “Man” or “boy” means a natural person who is male; 5. “Mother” means the female parent of a child or children as defined in Section 7 of this title; 6. “Natural person ” means a person as defined in paragraph 7 of this section, except for bodies politic or corporate; 7. “Person”, except when used by way of contrast, includes not only human beings, but bodies politic or corporate ; 8. “Sex” means a natural person ’s biological sex at birth; and 9. “Woman” or “girl” means a natural person wh o is female . Req. No. 778 Page 3  SECTION 3. AMENDATORY 25 O.S. 2021, Section 1101, is amended to read as follows: Section 1101. A. This act provides for exclusive remedies within the state of the p olicies for individuals alleging discrimination in employment on the bas is of race, color, national origin, sex, religion, creed, age, disability or genetic information. B. This act shall be construed according to the fair import of its terms to further t he general purposes stated in this section and the special purposes of t he particular provision involved. C. Any policy, program, or statute that prohibits sex discrimination is to be construed to forbid unfair treatment of females or males in relation to similarly situated members of the opposite sex. T he state or its polit ical subdivisions shall not be prohibited from establishing distinctions between sexes when such distinctions are substantially related to a n important government objective including b ut not limited to biology, privacy, safety, or fairness in locations an d circumstances such as prisons or other detention facilities, domestic violence shelters, rape crisis centers, athletics and locker rooms, and restrooms. SECTION 4. AMENDATORY 25 O.S. 2021, Section 1201, is amended to read as fol lows: Section 1201. In Section 1101 et seq. of this title, unless the context otherwise requires: Req. No. 778 Page 4  1. “Discriminatory practice ” means a practice designated as discriminatory under the terms of this act; 2. “Equal”, with reference to sex as defined in Section 62 of this title, shall not be construed to mean same or identical, and to differentiate between the sexes shall not necessarily be construed to be treating the sexes unequally; 3. “National origin ” includes the national orig in of an ancestor; and 3. 4. “Person” includes an individual, association, corporation, joint apprenticeship committee, joint -stock company, labor union, legal representative, mutual company, partnership, receiver, trust, trustee, trustee in bankruptcy, u nincorporated organization, any other legal or commercial entity, the state, or any governmental entity or agency. SECTION 5. NEW LAW A new section of law to be codified in the Oklahoma Statutes as Section 1202 of Title 25, unless there is created a duplication in numberin g, reads as follows: The stat e, any political subdivision , or any state agency or department including but not limited to public school districts that collects vital sta tistics for the purpose of gathering accurate public health, crime, economic or other d ata shall identify any natural person who is part of the collected data as either male or female as defined in Section 62 of Title 25 of the Oklahoma Statutes. Req. No. 778 Page 5  SECTION 6. This act shall become effective November 1, 2023. 59-1-778 TEK 1/16/2023 12:40:33 PM Introduced Version HOUSE BILL No. 1407 _____ DIGEST OF INTRODUCED B ILL Citations Affected: IC 31-9-2-13; IC 31-10.5; IC 31-34. Synopsis: Parental rights. Provides that the state of Indiana, a political subdivision or other governmental entity of the state of Indiana, a government official, or any other person acting under the color of law shall not infringe on the fundamental right of a parent to direct the upbringing, education, health care, and mental health of the parent's child without demonstrating that the infringement: (1) is required by a compelling governmental interest of the highest order as long recognized in the history and traditions of the state of Indiana; and (2) as applied to the child, is narrowly tailored and not otherwise served by a less restrictive means. Creates a right of action for violation of a parent's rights with respect to the upbringing, education, and health care of the parent's child. Provides that a child is not a child in need of services due to the child's parent, guardian, or custodian: (1) referring to and raising the child consistent with the child's biological sex; or (2) declining to consent to the child receiving: (A) specified medication; (B) a medical procedure the purpose of which is to alter the apparent gender or sex of the child or affirm the child's perception of the child's gender or sex in a manner inconsistent with the child's biological sex; or (C) counseling or other mental health services the purpose of which is to affirm the child's perception of the child's gender or sex if the child's perception is inconsistent with the child's biological sex. Provides that a juvenile court may not enter a dispositional decree ordering removal of a child from the home of the child's parent, guardian, or custodian if: (1) the juvenile court has found the child to be a child in need of services under a specified statutory definition of a child in need of services; and (2) the parent, guardian, or custodian of the child: (A) is a fit parent, guardian, or custodian of the child; and (B) does not consent to the child being removed from the child's home. Effective: July 1, 2023. DeVon January 17, 2023, read first time and referred to Commi ttee on Family, Children and Human Affairs. 2023 IN 1407—LS 7365/DI 119 Introduced First Reg ular Sessio n of the 123rd General A ssem bly (2023) PRINTING CODE. Amendments: Whenever an existing statute (or a section of the Indiana Constitution) is being amended, the text of the existing provision will appear in this style type, additions will appear in this sty le type, and deletions will appear in this style type. Additions: Whenever a new statutory provision is being enacted (or a new constitutional provision adopted), the text of the new provision will appear in this style type. Also, the word NEW will appear in that style type in the introductory clause of each SECTION that adds a new provision to the Indiana Code or the Indiana Constitution. Conflict reconciliation: Text in a statute in this style type or this style type reconciles conflicts between statutes enacted by the 2022 Regular Session of the General Assembly. HOUSE BILL No. 1407 A BILL FOR AN ACT to amend the Indiana Code concerning family law and juvenile law. Be it enacted by the General Assembly of the State of Indiana: 1 SECTION 1. IC 31-9-2-13, AS AMENDED BY P.L.243-2019, 2 SECTION 2, IS AMENDED TO READ AS FOLLOWS [EFFECTIVE 3 JULY 1, 2023]: Sec. 13. (a) "Child", for purposes of IC 31-15, IC 31-16 4 (excluding IC 31-16-12.5), and IC 31-17, means a child or children of 5 both parties to the marriage. The term includes the following: 6 (1) Children born out of wedlock to the parties. 7 (2) Children born or adopted during the marriage of the parties. 8 (b) "Child", for purposes of the Uniform Interstate Family Support 9 Act under IC 31-18.5, has the meaning set forth in IC 31-18.5-1-2. 10 (c) "Child", for purposes of IC 31-19-5, includes an unborn child. 11 (d) Except as otherwise provided in this section, "child", for 12 purposes of the juvenile law and IC 31-27, means: 13 (1) a person who is less than eighteen (18) years of age; 14 (2) a person: 15 (A) who is eighteen (18), nineteen (19), or twenty (20) years 16 of age; and 17 (B) who either: 2023 IN 1407—LS 7365/DI 119 2 1 (i) is charged with a delinquent act committed before the 2 person's eighteenth birthday; or 3 (ii) has been adjudicated a child in need of services before 4 the person's eighteenth birthday; or 5 (3) a person: 6 (A) who is alleged to have committed an act that would have 7 been murder if committed by an adult; 8 (B) who was less than eighteen (18) years of age at the time of 9 the alleged act; and 10 (C) who is less than twenty-one (21) years of age. 11 (e) "Child", for purposes of IC 31-36-3 and IC 31-10.5, means a 12 person who is less than eighteen (18) years of age. 13 (f) "Child", for purposes of the Interstate Compact on Juveniles 14 under IC 31-37-23-1, has the meaning set forth in IC 31-37-23-1. 15 (g) "Child", for purposes of IC 31-16-12.5, means an individual to 16 whom child support is owed under: 17 (1) a child support order issued under IC 31-14-10 or IC 31-16-6; 18 or 19 (2) any other child support order that is enforceable under 20 IC 31-16-12.5. 21 (h) "Child", for purposes of IC 31-32-5, means an individual who is 22 less than eighteen (18) years of age. 23 (i) "Child", for purposes of the Uniform Child Custody Jurisdiction 24 Act under IC 31-21, has the meaning set forth in IC 31-21-2-3. 25 (j) "Child", for purposes of IC 31-35-2-4.5, means an individual who 26 is: 27 (1) less than eighteen (18) years of age; and 28 (2) a delinquent child or a child in need of services. 29 SECTION 2. IC 31-10.5 IS ADDED TO THE INDIANA CODE AS 30 A NEW ARTICLE TO READ AS FOLLOWS [EFFECTIVE JULY 1, 31 2023]: 32 ARTICLE 10.5. PARENTAL RIGHTS AND 33 RESPONSIBILITIES 34 Chapter 1. Definitions 35 Sec. 1. Except as otherwise provided, the definitions in this 36 chapter apply throughout this article. 37 Sec. 2. "Parent" means, with regard to a child: 38 (1) a biological parent of the child; 39 (2) an adoptive parent of the child; or 40 (3) a legal guardian of the child. 41 Chapter 2. Rights of Parents 42 Sec. 1. (a) The state of Indiana, a political subdivision or other 2023 IN 1407—LS 7365/DI 119 3 1 governmental entity of the state of Indiana, a government official, 2 or any other person acting under the color of law shall not infringe 3 on the fundamental right of a parent to direct the upbringing, 4 education, health care, and mental health of the paren t's child 5 without demonstrating that the infringement: 6 (1) is required by a compelling governmental interest of the 7 highest order as long recognized in the history and traditions 8 of the state of Indiana; and 9 (2) as applied to the parent and the child, is narrowly tailored 10 and not otherwise served by a less restrictive means. 11 (b) Unless those rights have been legally waived or legally 12 terminated, parents have inalienable rights that are more 13 comprehensive than those described in subsection (a). Subsection 14 (a): 15 (1) does not prescribe all rights of parents; and 16 (2) does not preempt or foreclose claims or remedies in 17 support of parental rights that are available under the 18 Constitution of the United States, the Constitution of the State 19 of Indiana, or the statutes and common law of the state of 20 Indiana. 21 Sec. 2. (a) A parent: 22 (1) may bring an action for a violation of this chapter; and 23 (2) may raise this chapter as a defense in any judicial or 24 administrative proceeding regardless of whether the 25 proceeding is brought by or in the name of the state of 26 Indiana, a private person, or any other party. 27 (b) Notwithstanding any other provision of law: 28 (1) an action under this section may be commenced; and 29 (2) a court may grant relief in an action commenced under 30 this section; 31 regardless of whether the person commencing the action has 32 sought or exhausted administrative remedies available to the 33 person. 34 (c) A court may grant to a person who successfully asserts a 35 claim or defense under this section: 36 (1) declaratory relief; 37 (2) injunctive relief; 38 (3) compensatory damages; 39 (4) reasonable attorney's fees and costs; and 40 (5) any other relief the court considers appropriate. 41 (d) Sovereign, governmental, and qualified immunity to suit and 42 from liability are waived and abolished to the extent of liability 2023 IN 1407—LS 7365/DI 119 4 1 created by this chapter. 2 SECTION 3. IC 31-34-1-17 IS ADDED TO THE INDIANA CODE 3 AS A NEW SECTION TO READ AS FOLLOWS [EFFECTIVE JULY 4 1, 2023]: Sec. 17. A child is not a child in need of services under any 5 section of this chapter due to the child's parent, guardian, or 6 custodian: 7 (1) referring to and raising the child consistent with the 8 child's biological sex; 9 (2) declining to consent to the child receiving: 10 (A) puberty blocking medication; 11 (B) supraphysiologic doses of testosterone or estrogen; or 12 (C) any surgical procedure the purpose of which is to: 13 (i) alter the apparent gender or sex of the child in a 14 manner inconsistent with the child's biological sex; or 15 (ii) affirm the child's perception of the child's gender or 16 sex, if the child's perception is inconsistent with the 17 child's biological sex; or 18 (3) declining to consent to the child receiving counseling or 19 other mental health services for the purpose of affirming the 20 child's perception of the child's gender or sex, if the child's 21 perception is inconsistent with the child's biological sex. 22 SECTION 4. IC 31-34-20-1, AS AMENDED BY P.L.172-2022, 23 SECTION 9, IS AMENDED TO READ AS FOLLOWS [EFFECTIVE 24 JULY 1, 2023]: Sec. 1. (a) Subject to this section and section 1.5 of this 25 chapter, if a child is a child in need of services, the juvenile court may 26 enter one (1) or more of the following dispositional decrees: 27 (1) Order supervision of the child by the department. 28 (2) Order the child to receive outpatient treatment: 29 (A) at a social service agency or a psychological, a psychiatric, 30 a medical, or an educational facility; or 31 (B) from an individual practitioner. 32 (3) Remove the child from the child's home and authorize the 33 department to place the child in another home, shelter care 34 facility, child caring institution, group home, or secure private 35 facility. Placement under this subdivision includes authorization 36 to control and discipline the child. 37 (4) Award wardship of the child to the depa rtment for 38 supervision, care, and placement. 39 (5) Partially or completely emancipate the child under section 6 40 of this chapter. 41 (6) Order the child's parent, guardian, or custodian to complete 42 services recommended by the department and approved by the 2023 IN 1407—LS 7365/DI 119 5 1 court under IC 31-34-18 and IC 31-34-19, which may include 2 services described in section 3(a) of this chapter. 3 (7) Order a person who is a party to refrain from direct or indirect 4 contact with the child. 5 (8) Order a perpetrator of child abuse or neglect to refrain from 6 returning to the child's residence. 7 (b) A juvenile court may not place a child in a home or facility that 8 is located outside Indiana unless: 9 (1) the placement is recommended or approved by the director of 10 the department or the director's designee; or 11 (2) the juvenile court makes written findings based on clear and 12 convincing evidence that: 13 (A) the out-of-state placement is appropriate because there is 14 not an equivalent facility with adequate services located in 15 Indiana; 16 (B) institutional care in the other jurisdiction is in the best 17 interest of the child and will not produce undue hardship; or 18 (C) the location of the home or facility is within a distance not 19 greater than fifty (50) miles from the county of residence of 20 the child. 21 (c) A juvenile court may not enter a dispositional decree 22 ordering removal of a child from the home of the child's parent, 23 guardian, or custodian if: 24 (1) the juvenile court has found the child to be a child in need 25 of services under IC 31-34-1-6; and 26 (2) the parent, guardian, or custodian of the child: 27 (A) is a fit parent, guardian, or custodian of the child; and 28 (B) does not consent to the child being removed from the 29 child's home. 30 (c) (d) If a dispositional decree under this section: 31 (1) orders or approves removal of a child from the child's home or 32 awards wardship of the child to the department; and 33 (2) is the first juvenile court order in the child in need of services 34 proceeding that authorizes or approves removal of the child from 35 the child's parent, guardian, or custodian; 36 the juvenile court shall include in the decree the appropriate findings 37 and conclusions described in IC 31-34-5-3(b) and IC 31-34-5-3(c). 2023 IN 1407—LS 7365/DI 119 23.508.12 98th Legislative Session 1080 2023 South Dakota Legislature House Bill 1080 Introduced by: Representative Soye Underscores indicate new language. Overstrikes indicate deleted language. An Act to prohibit certain medical and surgical interventions on minor patients. 1 BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF SOUTH DAKOTA : 2 Section 1. That chapter 34-24 be amended with a NEW SECTION: 3 Terms used in sections 2 to 6, inclusive, of this Act, mean: 4 (1) "Minor," any person under the age of eighteen; and 5 (2) "Sex,” means the biological indication of male and female, as evidenced by sex 6 chromosomes, naturally occurring sex hormones, gonads, and nonambiguous 7 internal and external genitalia present at bir th. 8 Section 2. That chapter 34-24 be amended with a NEW SECTION: 9 Except as provided in section 3 of this Act, a he althcare professional may not, for 10 the purpose of attempting to alter the appearance of, or to validate a minor's perception 11 of, the minor’s sex, if that appearance or perception is inconsistent with the minor's sex, 12 knowingly: 13 (1) Prescribe or administer to a minor, any drug to delay or stop normal puberty; 14 (2) Prescribe or administer supraphysiologic doses of testosterone or other androgens 15 to a female; 16 (3) Prescribe or administer supraphysiologic doses of estrogen to a male; 17 (4) Perform any sterilizing s urgery, including castration, hysterectomy, oophorectomy, 18 orchiectomy, penectomy, and vasectomy; 19 (5) Perform any surgery that artificially constructs tissue having the appearance of 20 genitalia differing from the minor's sex, including metoidioplasty, phallo plasty, and 21 vaginoplasty; or 22 (6) Remove any healthy or non -diseased body part or tissue. 23 Section 3. That chapter 34-24 be amended with a NEW SECTION: 24 23.508.12 2 1080 Underscores indicate new language. Overstrikes indicate deleted language. The prohibitions of section 2 of this Act do not limit or restrict the provision of 1 services to: 2 (1) A minor born with a medically verifiable disorder of sex development, including 3 external biological sex characteristics that are irresolvably ambiguous; 4 (2) A minor diagnosed with a disorder of sexual development, if a healthcare provider 5 has determined, through genetic or biochemical testing, that the minor does not 6 have a sex chromosome structure, sex steroid hormone production, or sex steroid 7 hormone action, that is normal for a biological male or biological female; or 8 (3) A minor needing treatment for an infection, inju ry, disease, or disorder that has 9 been caused or exacerbated by any action or procedure prohibited by section 2 of 10 this Act. 11 Section 4. That chapter 34-24 be amended with a NEW SECTION: 12 If a professional or occupational licensing board finds, by a preponderance of the 13 evidence and in compliance with chap ter 1-26, that a healthcare professional licensed or 14 certified by the board has violated section 2 of this Act, the board must revoke any 15 professional or o ccupational license or certificate held by the healthcare professional. 16 Section 5. That chapter 34-24 be amended w ith a NEW SECTION: 17 Any civil action to recover damages for injury suffered as a result of a violation of 18 section 2 of this Act must be commenced before the later of: 19 (1) The date on which the person reaches age twenty -five; or 20 (2) Within three years from t he time the person discovered or reasonably should have 21 discovered that the injury or damages were caused by the violation. 22 Section 6. That chapter 34-24 be amended with a NEW SECTION: 23 If, prior to July 1, 2023, a healthcare professional has initiated a course of 24 treatment, for a minor, which includes the prescription or administration of any drug or 25 hormone prohibite d by section 2 of this Act, and if the healthcare professional determines 26 and documents in the minor's medical record that immediately terminating the minor's 27 use of the drug or hormone would cause harm to the minor, the healthcare professional 28 may institu te a period during which the minor's use of the drug or hormone is 29 systematically reduced. That period may not extend beyond December 31, 2023. 30 LEGISLATURE OF NEBRASKA ONE HUNDRED EIGHTH LEGISLATURE FIRST SESSION LEGISLATIVE BILL 574 Introduced by Kauth, 31; Aguilar, 35; Albrecht, 17; Bostelman, 23; Brewer, 43; Clements, 2; DeKay, 40; Dorn, 30; Dover, 19; Erdman, 47; Halloran, 33; Hardin, 48; Holdcroft, 36; Hughes, 24; Ibach, 44; Jacobson, 42; Linehan, 39; Lippincott, 34; Lowe, 37; McDonnell, 5; Murman, 38; Sanders, 45; von Gillern, 4. Read first time January 17, 2023 Committee: A BILL FOR AN ACT relating to public health and welfare; to amend section 1 38-179, Revised Statutes Cumulative Supplement, 2022; to adopt the 2 Let Them Grow Act; to harmonize provisions; to provide an operative 3 date; to provide severability; and to repeal the original section. 4 Be it enacted by the people of the State of Nebraska, 5LB574 2023LB574 2023 -1-Section 1. Section 38-179, Revised Statutes Cumulative Supplement, 1 2022, is amended to read: 2 38-179 For purposes of section 38-178, unprofessional conduct means 3 any departure from or failure to conform to the standards of acceptable 4 and prevailing practice of a profession or the ethics of the profession, 5 regardless of whether a person, consumer, or entity is injured, or 6 conduct that is likely to deceive or defraud the public or is detrimental 7 to the public interest, including, but not limited to: 8 (1) Receipt of fees on the assurance that an incurable disease can 9 be permanently cured; 10 (2) Division of fees, or agreeing to split or divide the fees, 11 received for professional services with any person for bringing or 12 referring a consumer other than (a) with a partner or employee of the 13 applicant or credential holder or his or her office or clinic, (b) with a 14 landlord of the applicant or credential holder pursuant to a written 15 agreement that provides for payment of rent based on gross receipts, or 16 (c) with a former partner or employee of the applicant or credential 17 holder based on a retirement plan or separation agreement; 18 (3) Obtaining any fee for professional services by fraud, deceit, or 19 misrepresentation, including, but not limited to, falsification of third- 20 party claim documents; 21 (4) Cheating on or attempting to subvert the credentialing 22 examination; 23 (5) Assisting in the care or treatment of a consumer without the 24 consent of such consumer or his or her legal representative; 25 (6) Use of any letters, words, or terms, either as a prefix, affix, 26 or suffix, on stationery, in advertisements, or otherwise, indicating 27 that such person is entitled to practice a profession for which he or she 28 is not credentialed; 29 (7) Performing, procuring, or aiding and abetting in the performance 30 or procurement of a criminal abortion; 31LB574 2023LB574 2023 -2-(8) Knowingly disclosing confidential information except as 1 otherwise permitted by law; 2 (9) Commission of any act of sexual abuse, misconduct, or 3 exploitation related to the practice of the profession of the applicant 4 or credential holder; 5 (10) Failure to keep and maintain adequate records of treatment or 6 service; 7 (11) Prescribing, administering, distributing, dispensing, giving, 8 or selling any controlled substance or other drug recognized as addictive 9 or dangerous for other than a medically accepted therapeutic purpose; 10 (12) Prescribing any controlled substance to (a) oneself or (b) 11 except in the case of a medical emergency (i) one's spouse, (ii) one's 12 child, (iii) one's parent, (iv) one's sibling, or (v) any other person 13 living in the same household as the prescriber; 14 (13) Failure to comply with any federal, state, or municipal law, 15 ordinance, rule, or regulation that pertains to the applicable 16 profession; 17 (14) Disruptive behavior, whether verbal or physical, which 18 interferes with consumer care or could reasonably be expected to 19 interfere with such care; and 20 (15) Performing gender altering procedures for an individual younger 21 than nineteen years of age in violation of section 5 of this act; and 22 (16) (15) Such other acts as may be defined in rules and 23 regulations. 24 Nothing in this section shall be construed to exclude determination 25 of additional conduct that is unprofessional by adjudication in 26 individual contested cases. 27 Sec. 2. Sections 2 to 7 of this act shall be known and may be cited 28 as the Let Them Grow Act. 29 Sec. 3. The Legislature finds that: 30 (1) The state has a compelling government interest in protecting the 31LB574 2023LB574 2023 -3-health and safety of its citizens, especially vulnerable children; 1 (2) Genital and nongenital gender altering surgeries are generally 2 not recommended for children, although evidence indicates referral for 3 children to have such surgeries are becoming more frequent; and 4 (3) Genital and nongenital gender altering surgery includes several 5 irreversible and invasive procedures for biological males and biological 6 females and involves the alteration of biologically healthy and 7 functional body parts. 8 Sec. 4. For purposes of the Let Them Grow Act: 9 (1) Biological sex means the biological indication of male and 10 female in the context of reproductive potential or capacity, such as sex 11 chromosomes, naturally occurring sex hormones, gonads, and nonambiguous 12 internal and external genitalia present at birth, without regard to an 13 individual's psychological, chosen, or subjective experience of gender; 14 (2) Cross-sex hormones means testosterone or other androgens given 15 to biological females in amounts that are larger or more potent than 16 would normally occur naturally in healthy biological sex females and 17 estrogen given to biological males in amounts that are larger or more 18 potent than would normally occur naturally in healthy biological sex 19 males; 20 (3) Gender means the psychological, behavioral, social, and cultural 21 aspects of being male or female; 22 (4) Gender altering surgery means any medical or surgical service 23 that seeks to surgically alter or remove healthy physical or anatomical 24 characteristics or features that are typical for the individual's 25 biological sex in order to instill or create physiological or anatomical 26 characteristics that resemble a sex different from the individual's 27 biological sex, including without limitation, genital or nongenital 28 gender altering surgery performed for the purpose of assisting an 29 individual with a gender alteration; 30 (5) Gender alteration means the process in which a person goes from 31LB574 2023LB574 2023 -4-identifying with and living as a gender that corresponds to his or her 1 biological sex to identifying with and living as a gender different from 2 his or her biological sex and may involve social, legal, or physical 3 changes; 4 (6)(a) Gender altering procedures includes any medical or surgical 5 service, including without limitation physician's services, inpatient and 6 outpatient hospital services, or prescribed drugs related to gender 7 alteration, that seeks to: 8 (i) Alter or remove physical or anatomical characteristics or 9 features that are typical for the individual's biological sex; or 10 (ii) Instill or create physiological or anatomical characteristics 11 that resemble a sex different from the individual's biological sex, 12 including without limitation medical services that provide puberty- 13 blocking drugs, cross-sex hormones, or other mechanisms to promote the 14 development of feminizing or masculinizing features in the opposite 15 biological sex, or genital or nongenital gender altering surgery 16 performed for the purpose of assisting an individual with a gender 17 alteration; 18 (b) Gender altering procedures does not include: 19 (i) Services to persons born with a medically verifiable disorder of 20 sex development, including a person with external biological sex 21 characteristics that are irresolvably ambiguous, such as those born with 22 46 XX chromosomes with virilization, 46 XY chromosomes with 23 undervirilization, or having both ovarian and testicular tissue; 24 (ii) Services provided when a health care practitioner has otherwise 25 diagnosed a disorder of sexual development that the health care 26 practitioner has determined, through genetic or biochemical testing, that 27 the person does not have normal sex chromosome structure, sex steroid 28 production, or sex steroid hormone action; 29 (iii) The acute and chronic treatment of any infection, injury, 30 disease, or disorder that has been caused by or exacerbated by the 31LB574 2023LB574 2023 -5-performance of gender altering procedures, whether or not the gender 1 altering procedure was performed in accordance with state and federal 2 law; or 3 (iv) Any procedure undertaken because the individual suffers from a 4 physical disorder, physical injury, or physical illness that would, as 5 certified by the health care practitioner, place the individual in 6 imminent danger of death or impairment of major bodily function unless 7 surgery is performed; 8 (7) Genital gender altering surgery means a medical procedure 9 performed for the purpose of assisting an individual with a gender 10 alteration, including without limitation: 11 (a) Surgical procedures such as penectomy, orchiectomy, 12 vaginoplasty, clitoroplasty, or vulvoplasty for biologically male 13 patients or hysterectomy or ovariectomy for biologically female patients; 14 (b) Reconstruction of the fixed part of the urethra with or without 15 a metoidioplasty; or 16 (c) Phalloplasty, vaginectomy, scrotoplasty, or implantation of 17 erection or testicular prostheses for biologically female patients; 18 (8) Health care practitioner means a person licensed or certified 19 under the Uniform Credentialing Act; 20 (9) Puberty-blocking drugs means gonadotropin-releasing hormone 21 analogues or other synthetic drugs used in biological males to stop 22 luteinizing hormone secretion and therefore testosterone secretion, or 23 synthetic drugs used in biological females which stop the production of 24 estrogens and progesterone, when used to delay or suppress pubertal 25 development in children for the purpose of assisting an individual with a 26 gender alteration; and 27 (10) Nongenital gender altering surgery means medical procedures 28 performed for the purpose of assisting an individual with a gender 29 alteration, including without limitation: 30 (a) Surgical procedures for biologically male patients, such as 31LB574 2023LB574 2023 -6-augmentation mammoplasty, facial feminization surgery, liposuction, 1 lipofilling, voice surgery, thyroid cartilage reduction, gluteal 2 augmentation, hair reconstruction, or various aesthetic procedures; or 3 (b) Surgical procedures for biologically female patients, such as 4 subcutaneous mastectomy, voice surgery, liposuction, lipofilling, 5 pectoral implants, or various aesthetic procedures. 6 Sec. 5. (1) No health care practitioner shall (a) perform gender 7 altering procedures in this state for an individual younger than nineteen 8 years of age or (b) refer an individual younger than nineteen years of 9 age for gender altering procedures. 10 (2) The intentional and knowing performance of or referral for 11 gender altering procedures by a health care practitioner for an 12 individual younger than nineteen years of age in violation of subsection 13 (1) of this section shall be considered unprofessional conduct as defined 14 in section 38-179. 15 Sec. 6. State funds shall not be directly or indirectly used, 16 granted, paid, or distributed to any entity, organization, or individual 17 that provides gender altering procedures to an individual younger than 18 nineteen years of age. 19 Sec. 7. An individual that received a gender altering procedure 20 while such individual was younger than nineteen years of age, or the 21 parent or guardian of such an individual, may bring a civil action for 22 appropriate relief against the health care practitioner who performed the 23 gender altering procedure or referred the individual under nineteen years 24 of age for the gender altering procedure. Appropriate relief in an action 25 under this section includes actual damages and reasonable attorney's 26 fees. An action under this section shall be brought within 2 years from 27 discovery of damages. 28 Sec. 8. This act becomes operative on October 1, 2023. 29 Sec. 9. If any section in this act or any part of any section is 30 declared invalid or unconstitutional, the declaration shall not affect 31LB574 2023LB574 2023 -7-the validity or constitutionality of the remaining portions. 1 Sec. 10. Original section 38-179, Revised Statutes Cumulative 2 Supplement, 2022, is repealed. 3LB574 2023LB574 2023 -8- Req. No. 5428 Page 1  STATE OF OKLAHOMA 1st Session of the 59th Legislature (2023) HOUSE BILL 1377 By: Gann AS INTRODUCED An Act relating to public health and safe ty; creating the Oklahoma Save Adolescents from Experimentation (SAFE) Ac t; defining terms; imposi ng duties and requirements; establishing liability ; providing legal remedies; creating restrictions; providing for codification; and providing an ef fective date. BE IT ENACTED BY THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF OKLAHOMA: SECTION 1. NEW LAW A new section of law to be codified in the O klahoma Statutes as Section 2606 of Title 63, unless there is created a d uplication in nu mbering, reads as follows: This act sh all be known and may be cited as the "Oklahoma Save Adolescents from Experimentation ( SAFE) Act". SECTION 2. NEW LAW A new section of law to be codified in the Oklahoma Statutes as Section 2607 of Title 63, unless there is created a duplication in numbering, reads as follows: A. As used in this sect ion: 1. "Biological sex " means the biological indication of male and female in the con text of reprod uctive potential or capacity, su ch as Req. No. 5428 Page 2  sex chromo somes, naturally occur ring sex hormon es, gonads , and nonambig uous internal and ext ernal genitalia present at birth, without regard to an indivi dual's psychological, cho sen or subjective experience of gender ; 2. "Cross-sex hormones" means testosterone or o ther androgens given to biological females in amounts that are larger or more potent t han would normall y occur naturally in healthy biol ogical females and estrogen give n to biological males in amounts that a re larger or more potent than woul d normall y occur naturally in healthy biological males; 3. "Gender" means the psychological, behavioral, social , and cultural aspects of being male or fema le; 4. "Gender reassignmen t surgery" means any medic al or sur gical service that seeks to surgically alter or remov e healthy physical or anatomical characteristics or features that are typical for the individual 's biological sex, in order to instill or create physiological or anatom ical characteristics that resemble a se x different from the individual 's biological sex, including, but not limited to , genital or nongen ital gender reassignment surgery performed for the purpose of assisting an individual with gen der transition ; 5. "Gender transition" means the process in which a person goes from identifying an d living as a g ender that corresponds to his or her biologi cal sex to identifying and living as a gender different Req. No. 5428 Page 3  from his or her biological sex, and ma y involve social, legal or physical change s; 6. "Gender transition proce dures" means any medic al or su rgical service, including , but not limited to , physician's services, inpatient and outpatient hospital services, or pres cribed dru gs related to gen der transition that seeks to: a. alter or remove phy sical or anatomical character istics or features that are t ypical for the i ndividual's biological sex , or b. instill or create phy siological or anatomical characteristics that re semble a se x different from the individual's biological sex, including, but not limited to , medical services t hat provide pu berty- blocking drugs, cross -sex hormones, or other mechanisms to promote the de velopment of feminizing or masculinizing features in the opposite biologi cal sex, or genital or nongenital rea ssignment surgery performed for the purpose of assis ting an individ ual with a gend er transition . Gender transition procedures do not inclu de: a. services to persons born with a medically verifiable disorder of sex devel opment, including a p erson with external biological sex characterist ics that a re irresolvabl y ambiguous , such as thos e born with 4 6 XX Req. No. 5428 Page 4  chromoso mes with virilization , 46 XY chromosomes with under virilization , or having both ovarian and testicular t issue, b. services provided when a physician has otherwise diagnosed a disorder of se xual development that the physician has determin ed through genetic or biochemical testing t hat the person does not have normal se x chromosome s structure, sex steroid hormone production or sex steroid hormone action , c. treatment of any infection, in jury, disease, or disorder that has been c aused by or exacerbated by the performance of gender transition procedures , whether or not the gender transition p rocedure was performed in accordance with state and federal l aw or whether or not funding f or the gen der transition procedure is permissible u nder this act, or d. any procedure under taken becaus e the indi vidual suffers from a physical disorder, physical injury , or physical illness that would, as certif ied by a physician, place the individual in imminent danger of death or impa irment of major bod ily function unless such procedure is performed ; Req. No. 5428 Page 5  7. "Genital g ender reassignment surger y" means a medical procedure perfor med for the purpose of assisting a n individual with a gender transition, including, but not limited to : a. surgical procedures such as penect omy, orchiect omy, vaginopla sty, clit oroplasty, or vu lvoplast y for biological ly male pat ients or hysterectom y or ovariectomy for biologically female pa tients, b. reconstruction of the fixed part of the urethra with or without a metoidioplasty , or c. phalloplasty, vagine ctomy, scrotoplasty or implantation of erection or testicular prostheses for biologically fema le patients; 8. "Health care professional " means a person who is licensed, certified or otherwise authorized by the laws of this state to administ er health car e in the ordinary course of the p ractice of his or her profession ; 9. "Nongenital gender reassign ment surgery" means medical procedures perf ormed for the purpo se of assisting an individual with a gender transition including, but not limited to : a. surgical procedures for biologi cally male patients , such as augmentation ma mmoplast y, facial feminiza tion surgery, liposuction, lipofilling, voice surgery, thyroid car tilage reduction, gluteal au gmentation, Req. No. 5428 Page 6  hair reconstruction or various aesthetic p rocedures, or b. surgical procedures for biologically female pa tients, such as subcutaneous mastectom y, voice surger y, liposuction, lipofilling, pectoral implants , or various aesthetic procedures; 10. "Physician" means a person who is licensed in t his stat e to practice medicine; 11. "Puberty-blocking drugs" means gonadotropin -releasing hormone analo gues or other synthetic drugs used in biolog ical males to stop luteinizing hormone secretion and therefore te stosterone secretion or synthetic drugs used in biol ogical females which stop the production of estrogen an d progester one when used to delay or suppress pubertal deve lopment in children f or the p urpose of assisting an indi vidual with a gender transition ; and 12. "Public fund s" means state, c ounty, or local government monies, in addition to any department, agency or instrumenta lity authorized or appropr iated under stat e law or derived from any fund in which such mon ies are de posited. B. A physician or other health care professional shall not provide gender tran sition proce dures to any individual under eighteen (18) years of age. C. A physician or other health care pro fessional shall not refer any individual under ei ghteen (18) years of age to any Req. No. 5428 Page 7  physician or health care pro fessional for gen der transition procedures . D. It shall be pr ohibited for an y public mon ies to be directly or indirect ly used, granted, paid , or distributed to any entity, organization , or individual who provides gender transition procedures to a n individual under eighteen (18) yea rs of age. E. Any referra l for or provision of gen der tran sition procedures to an in dividual under eighteen (18) years of age shall be considered unprofessional conduct a nd is sub ject to disciplinary action by the appro priate l icensing body or disciplinar y review board with jurisdiction in this s tate. 1. A person may assert an actual or threat ened violation of this act as a claim or defense in a judi cial or administrative proceedi ng and obtain compensatory damages, in junctive r elief, declaratory reli ef or any other appropr iate rel ief. 2. A person shall bring a claim for a violation of this act no later than two (2) years after the da y the ca use of action occurs. 3. An individual u nder eighteen (18) years of age may bring an action throughout his or her minority through a parent or next friend, and may bring an action in his or her own name upon reaching majority at any ti me from that point until twenty ( 20) years after reaching the age of majority. Req. No. 5428 Page 8  4. In any actio n or proceedi ng to enforce a provision of this act, a prevailing party who est ablishes a violation of this act shall recover reasonable attorneys ' fees. F. Insurance covera ge for gender tran sition proc edures within this state for individuals under eighte en (18) years of age shall be prohibited . 1. A health benefit plan under an in surance policy o r other plan providing he alth care coverage in this state shall not include reimbursement for gender transition pr ocedures for a person under eighteen (18) years of age . 2. A health benefit plan under a n insurance polic y or other plan providing health care coverage in this state is not required to provide coverage for g ender transi tion procedures. SECTION 3. This act shall become effective November 1, 2023. 59-1-5428 TJ 12/05/22 2023-2024 Bill 3730 Text of Previous Version (Jan. 18, 2023) - South Carolina Legislature Online South Carolina General Assembly125th Session, 2023-2024Bill 3730Indicates Matter StrickenIndicates New Matter(Text matches printed bills. Document has been reformatted to meet World Wide Web specifications.) A bill TO AMEND THE SOUTH CAROLINA CODE OF LAWS BY ENACTING THE "MILLSTONE ACT OF 2023"; AND BY ADDING CHAPTER 141 TO TITLE 44 SO AS TO PROHIBIT HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONALS FROM MAKING REFERRALS FOR OR PROVIDING GENDER-TRANSITION PROCEDURES OR SERVICES TO ANYONE UNDER TWENTY-SIX YEARS OF AGE; TO PROHIBIT THE USE OF PUBLIC FUNDS FOR SUCH PROCEDURES; and TO CREATE A CRIMINAL PENALTY FOR VIOLATions, PROVIDE FOR PROFESSIONAL DISCIPLINE, ALLOW A PRIVATE RIGHT OF ACTION, AND AUTHORIZE THE ATTORNEY GENERAL TO ENFORCE THE CHAPTER. Be it enacted by the General Assembly of the State of South Carolina: SECTION 1. This act may be cited as the "Millstone Act of 2023". SECTION 2. Title 44 of the S.C. Code is amended by adding: CHAPTER 141 Millstone Act of 2023 Section 44-141-10. As used in this chapter: (1) "Biological sex" means the biological indication of male and female in the context of reproductive potential or capacity, such as sex chromosomes, naturally occurring sex hormones, gonads, and nonambiguous internal and external genitalia present at birth, without regard to an individual's psychological, chosen, or subjective experience of gender. (2) "Cross-sex hormones" means: (a) testosterone or other androgens given to biological females in amounts that are larger or more potent than would normally occur naturally in healthy biological sex females; and (b) estrogen given to biological males in amounts that are larger or more potent than would normally occur naturally in healthy biological sex males. (3) "Gender" means the psychological, behavioral, social, and cultural aspects of being male or female. (4) "Gender-reassignment surgery" means any medical or surgical service that seeks to surgically alter or remove healthy physical or anatomical characteristics or features that are typical for the individual's biological sex, in order to instill or create physiological or anatomical characteristics that resemble a sex different from the individual's biological sex including, but not limited to, genital or nongenital gender-reassignment surgery. (5) "Gender transition" means the process in which a person goes from identifying with and living as a gender that corresponds to his or her biological sex to identifying with and living as a gender different from his or her biological sex, and may involve social, legal, or physical changes. (6)(a) "Gender-transition procedures" means any medical or surgical service including, but not limited to, physician's services, inpatient and outpatient hospital services, or prescribed drugs related to gender transition that seeks to: (i) alter or remove physical or anatomical characteristics or features that are typical for the individual's biological sex; or (ii) instill or create physiological or anatomical characteristics that resemble a sex different from the individual's biological sex including, but not limited to, medical services that provide puberty-blocking drugs, cross-sex hormones, or other mechanisms to promote the development of feminizing or masculinizing features in the opposite biological sex, or genital or nongenital gender-reassignment surgery performed for the purpose of assisting an individual with a gender transition. (b) Gender-transition procedures do not include: (i) services to persons born with a medically verifiable disorder of sex development, including a person with external biological sex characteristics that are irresolvably ambiguous, such as those born with 46 XX chromosomes with virilization, 46 XY chromosomes with undervirilization, or having both ovarian and testicular tissue; (ii) services provided when a physician has otherwise diagnosed a disorder of sexual development that the physician has determined through genetic or biochemical testing that the person does not have normal sex chromosome structure, sex steroid hormone production, or sex steroid hormone action; (iii) the treatment of any infection, injury, disease, or disorder that has been caused by or exacerbated by the performance of gender-transition procedures, whether or not the gender-transition procedure was performed in accordance with state and federal law; or (iv) any procedure undertaken because the individual suffers from a physical disorder, physical injury, or physical illness that would, as certified by a physician, place the individual in imminent danger of death or impairment of major bodily function unless surgery is performed. (7) "Genital gender-reassignment surgery" means a medical procedure performed for the purpose of assisting an individual with a gender transition, including but not limited to: (a) surgical procedures such as penectomy, orchiectomy, vaginoplasty, clitoroplasty, or vulvoplasty for biologically male patients or hysterectomy or oophorectomy for biologically female patients; (b) reconstruction of the fixed part of the urethra with or without a metoidioplasty; or (c) phalloplasty, vaginectomy, scrotoplasty, or implantation of erection or testicular prostheses for biologically female patients. (8) "Health care professional" means a person who is licensed, certified, or otherwise authorized by the laws of this State to administer health care in the ordinary course of the practice of the person's profession. (9) "Nongenital gender-reassignment surgery" means medical procedures performed for the purpose of assisting an individual with a gender transition including, but not limited to: (a) surgical procedures for biologically male patients, such as augmentation mammoplasty, facial feminization surgery, liposuction, lipofilling, voice surgery, thyroid cartilage reduction, gluteal augmentation, hair reconstruction, or various aesthetic procedures; or (b) surgical procedures for biologically female patients, such as subcutaneous mastectomy, voice surgery, liposuction, lipofilling, pectoral implants, or various aesthetic procedures. (10) "Physician" means a person who is licensed to practice medicine in this State. (11) "Puberty-blocking drugs" means gonadotropin releasing hormone analogues or other synthetic drugs used in biological males to stop luteinizing hormone secretion and therefore testosterone secretion, or synthetic drugs used in biological females which stop the production of estrogen and progesterone, when used to delay or suppress pubertal development in children for the purpose of assisting an individual with a gender transition (12) "Public funds" means state, county, or local governmental monies, in addition to any department, agency, or instrumentality authorized or appropriated under state law or derived from any fund authorized or appropriated under state law or derived from any fund in which such monies are deposited. Section 44-141-20. (A) A physician or other health care professional shall not provide gender-transition procedures to any individual under twenty-six years of age. (B) A physician or other health care professional shall not refer any individual under twenty-six years of age to any health care professional for gender-transition procedures. (C) A physician or other health care professional is not prohibited from providing any of the following procedures which are not gender-transition procedures to an individual under twenty-six years of age: (1) services to persons born with a medically verifiable disorder of sex development, including a person with external biological sex characteristics that are irresolvably ambiguous, such as those born with 46 XX chromosomes with virilization, 46 XY chromosomes with undervirilization, or having both ovarian and testicular tissue; (2) services provided when a physician has otherwise diagnosed a disorder of sexual development that the physician has determined through genetic or biochemical testing that the person does not have normal sex chromosome structure, sex steroid hormone production, or sex steroid hormone action; (3) the treatment of any infection, injury, disease, or disorder that has been caused by or exacerbated by the performance of gender-transition procedures, whether or not the gender-transition procedure was performed in accordance with state and federal law or whether or not funding for the gender-transition procedure is permissible under Section 44-141-30; or (4) any procedure undertaken because the individual suffers from a physical disorder, physical injury, or physical illness that would, as certified by a physician, place the individual in imminent danger of death or impairment of major bodily function unless surgery is performed. Section 44-141-30. (A) Public funds shall not be directly or indirectly used, granted, paid, or distributed to any entity, organization, or individual that provides gender-transition procedures to an individual under twenty-six years of age. (B) Health care services furnished in the following situations shall not include gender-transition procedures to an individual under twenty-six years of age: (1) by or in a health care facility owned by the State or a county or local government; or (2) by a physician or other health care professional employed by the State or a county or local government. (C) The state Medicaid program shall not reimburse or provide coverage for gender-transition procedures to an individual under twenty-six years of age. Section 44-141-40. (A)(1) A physician or other health care professional found to have knowingly referred for or provided gender-transition procedures to an individual under twenty-six years of age is guilty of a felony and, upon conviction, may be imprisoned not more than five years. (2) Prosecution for a criminal violation of this subsection must be commenced within forty years after the commission of such offense. (B)(1) Any referral for or provision of gender-transition procedures to an individual under twenty-six years of age is unprofessional conduct and shall, upon an adverse ruling by the appropriate licensing board, result in immediate revocation of the license or certificate of the physician or other health care professional. (2) Disciplinary proceedings against the physician or other health care professional must be commenced within forty years after the commission of such offense. (C)(1) A person may assert an actual or threatened violation of this chapter as a claim or defense in a judicial or administrative proceeding and obtain compensatory damages, injunctive relief, declaratory relief, or any other appropriate relief. (2) A person shall bring a claim for a violation of this chapter no later than forty years after the day the cause of action accrues. (3) An individual under eighteen years of age may bring an action throughout their minority through a parent or next friend, and may bring an action in their own name upon reaching majority at any time from that point until forty years after reaching the age of majority. (4) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, an action under this subsection may be commenced, and relief may be granted, in a judicial proceeding without regard to whether the person commencing the action has sought or exhausted available administrative remedies. (5) In any action or proceeding to enforce a provision of this chapter, a prevailing party who establishes a violation of this chapter shall recover reasonable attorney fees. (D)(1) The Attorney General may bring an action to enforce compliance with this chapter. (2) This chapter does not deny, impair, or otherwise affect any right or authority of the Attorney General, this State, or any agency, officer, or employee of the State, acting under any law other than this act, to institute or intervene in any proceeding. SECTION 3. The repeal or amendment by this act of any law, whether temporary or permanent or civil or criminal, does not affect pending actions, rights, duties, or liabilities founded thereon, or alter, discharge, release or extinguish any penalty, forfeiture, or liability incurred under the repealed or amended law, unless the repealed or amended provision shall so expressly provide. After the effective date of this act, all laws repealed or amended by this act must be taken and treated as remaining in full force and effect for the purpose of sustaining any pending or vested right, civil action, special proceeding, criminal prosecution, or appeal existing as of the effective date of this act, and for the enforcement of rights, duties, penalties, forfeitures, and liabilities as they stood under the repealed or amended laws. SECTION 4. This act takes effect upon approval by the Governor. ----XX---- This web page was last updated on January 18, 2023 at 02:50 PM Req. No. 5651 Page 1  STATE OF OKLAHOMA 1st Session of the 59th Legislature (2023) HOUSE BILL 1449 By: Hasenbeck AS INTRODUCED An Act relating to women; enacting the Women's Bill of Rights Act of 2023; providing for noncodification; and providing an effective d ate. BE IT ENACTED BY THE PEOPLE OF T HE STATE OF OKLAHOMA: SECTION 1. NEW LAW A new section of law not to be codified in the Oklahoma Statutes reads as follows: This act shall be known and may be cited as the "Women's Bi ll of Rights Act of 2023 ". SECTION 2. This act shall become effecti ve November 1, 2023. 59-1-5651 CMA 01/17/23 Req. No. 1454 Page 1  STATE OF OKLAHOMA 1st Session of the 59th Legislature (2023) SENATE BILL 878 By: Jett AS INTRODUCED An Act relating to health care; creating the Oklahoma Save Adolescents fro m Experimentatio n (SAFE) Act ; providing short title; defining terms ; prohibiting provision of or referral for gender transition procedures ; providing exceptions; pro hibiting certain uses of public funds, public facilities , public employees , and state M edicaid program ; providing for administrative and civil enforce ment; au thorizing certain civil actions and relief ; providing certain construction; providing for codification; and declaring an emergency . BE IT ENACTED BY THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF OKLAHOMA: SECTION 1. NEW LAW A new section of law to be codified in the Oklahoma Statutes as Section 2607.1 of Title 63, unless there is created a duplication in numbering, reads as follows: This act shall be known and may be cited as the “Oklahoma S ave Adolescents fro m Experimentation (SAFE) Act ”. SECTION 2. NEW LAW A new section of law to be codified in the Oklahoma Statutes as Section 2607.2 of Title 63, unless there is created a duplication in numbering, rea ds as follows: As used in this act: 1. “Biological sex ” means the biological indication of male and female in the context of reproductive potential or capacity, such as Req. No. 1454 Page 2  sex chromosomes, naturally occurring sex hormones, gonads, and nonambiguous internal a nd external geni talia present at birth, without regard to an individual’s psychological, chosen, or subjective experience of gender; 2. “Cross-sex hormones ” means: a. testosterone or other androgens given to biological females in amounts that are larger o r more potent th an would normally occur naturally in healt hy biolog ical sex females , and b. estrogen given to biological males in amounts that are larger or more potent than would normally occur naturally in healthy biological sex males; 3. “Gender” means the psychologic al, behavioral, social, and cultural aspe cts of bei ng male or female; 4. “Gender reassignment surgery ” means any medical or surgical service that seeks to surgically alter or remove healthy physical or anatomical characteristics or feature s that are typic al for the individual ’s biological sex, i n order to instill or create physiologi cal or anatomical characteristics that resemble a sex different from the individual ’s biological sex, including but not limited to genital or nongenital gender reassignment sur gery performed for the purpose of assisti ng an indi vidual with a gender transiti on; Req. No. 1454 Page 3  5. “Gender transition ” means the process in which a person goes from identifying with and living as a gender that corresponds to his or her biological sex to identifying w ith and living as a gender different from his or he r biological sex, and may inv olve social, legal, or physical changes; 6. a. “Gender transition procedures ” means any medical or surgical service, including but not limited to physician ’s services, inpati ent and outpatient hospital services, or pr escribed drugs related to gender tran sition that seeks to: (1) alter or remove physica l or anatomical characteristics or features that are typical for the individual ’s biological sex, or (2) instill or create phys iological or anatomical characteristics tha t resemb le a sex different from the i ndividual ’s biological sex, including but not lim ited to medical services that provide puberty-blocking drugs, cross -sex hormones, or other mechanisms to promot e the developmen t of feminizing or masculinizing features i n the opposite biological sex, or gen ital or nongenital gender reassignment surgery pe rformed for the purpose of assisting an individual with a gender transition. Req. No. 1454 Page 4  b. Gender transition procedures do not include: (1) services to persons born with a medically verifiable disorder of sex developme nt, including a person with external biological s ex characteristics that are irresolvably ambiguous, such as those born with 46 XX chromosomes with virilization , 46 XY chromoso mes with undervirilization, or having both ovarian and testicular tissue, (2) services provided when a physician has otherwise diagnosed a disorder of sexual development that the physician has determined through genetic or biochemical testi ng that the pers on does not have normal sex chromosome structure, sex steroid hormone production , or sex steroid hormone action, (3) the treatmen t of any infection, injury, disease, or disorder that has been caused by or exacerbated by the performance of g ender transition procedures, whether or not the gender transition procedure was performed in acc ordance with state and federal law, or (4) any procedure undertaken because the individual suffers from a physical disorder, physical Req. No. 1454 Page 5  injury, or physical illnes s that would, as certified by a physician, place the indivi dual in imminent danger of death or i mpairment of major bodily function unless surgery is performed; 7. “Genital gender reassignment surgery ” means a medical procedure performed for the purpose of assisting an in dividual with a gender transition, includin g but no t limited to: a. surgical pro cedures such as penectomy, orchiectomy, vaginopl asty, clitoroplasty, or vulvoplasty for biologically male patients or hysterectomy or oophorectomy for biologica lly female patie nts, b. reconstruction of the fixed part of the urethra with or without a metoid ioplasty, or c. phalloplasty, vaginectomy, scroto plasty, or implantation of erection or testicular prostheses for biologically female patients; 8. “Healthcare professional ” means a person who is licensed, certified, or otherwise authorized by the laws of this state to administer health care in the ordin ary course of the practice of his or her profession; 9. “Nongenital gender reassignment surgery ” means medical procedures perf ormed for the purpose of assisting an indiv idual wi th a gender transition includ ing but not limited to: Req. No. 1454 Page 6  a. surgical procedures fo r biologically male patients, such as augmentation mammoplasty, facial feminization surgery, liposuction, lipofilling, voice su rgery, thyroid cartilage reduction, gluteal augmentation, hair reconstruction, o r various aesthetic procedures, or b. surgical pr ocedures for biologically female patients, such as subcutaneous mastectomy, voice surgery, liposuction, lipofil ling, pectoral i mplants, or various aesthetic procedures; 10. “Physician” means a person who is licensed to practice medicine in this state; 11. “Puberty-blocking drugs ” means gonadotropin -releasing hormone analogues or other synthetic drugs used in biol ogical males to stop luteinizing hormone secretion and ther efore te stosterone secretion, or synt hetic drugs used in biological females which stop the production of estrogens and progesterone, when used to delay or suppress pubertal development in children for the purpose of assisting an individual with a gender tr ansition ; and 12. “Public funds ” means state, county, or local government monies, in addition to any department, agency, or instrumentality authorized or appropriated under state law or derived fr om any fund in which such moneys are deposited. Req. No. 1454 Page 7  SECTION 3. NEW LAW A new section of law to be codified in the Oklahoma Statutes as Section 2607. 3 of Title 63, unless there is created a duplication in numbering, reads as follows: A. A physician or other healthcare professional shall not provide gen der transition procedures to any individual under eighteen (18) years of age. B. A physician or other healthcare professional shall not refer any individual under eighteen (18) years of ag e to any healthc are professional for gender transition procedures. C. A physician or other healthcare professional is not prohibited from providing any of the following procedures which are not gender transition procedures to an individual under eighteen (18) years of ag e: 1. Services to persons born with a medically verifiable disorder of se x development, including a person with exter nal biological sex characteristics that are irresolvably ambiguous, such as those born with 46 XX chromosomes with viriliz ation, 46 XY chromosomes with undervirilization, or h aving both o varian and testicular tis sue; 2. Services provided when a physician has otherwise diagnosed a disorder of sexual development that the physician has determined through genetic or biochemical testing that the person does not have normal sex chro mosome struc ture, sex steroid hormone production, or sex steroid hormone action; Req. No. 1454 Page 8  3. The treatment of any infection, injury, disease, or disorder that has been caused by or exacerbated by the performance of gender transition procedures, whether or not the gender trans ition procedure was perfo rmed in accordance with state and federal la w or whether or not funding for the gender transition procedure is permissible under Section 4 of this act; or 4. Any pro cedure undertake n because the individual suffers from a physical di sorder, physical injury , or physical illness that would, as certified by a physician, place the individual in imminent danger of death or impairment of major bodily function unless surgery is performed. SECTION 4. NEW LAW A new sect ion of law to be codifi ed in the Oklahoma Statutes as Section 2607.4 of Title 63, unless there is created a duplication in numbering, reads as follows: A. Public funds shall not be directl y or indirectly used, granted, paid, or distributed to a ny entity, organization, or individual that provides gender transition pr ocedures to an individual under eighteen (18) years of age. B. Healthcare services furnished in the following situations shall not include gen der transition procedures to an indivi dual under eighteen (18) years of age: 1. By or in a healthcare facility o wned by the state or a county or local government; or Req. No. 1454 Page 9  2. By a physician or other healthcare professional employed by the state or a county or local government. C. The state Medicaid program shall not reimburse o r provide coverage for gender transition procedures to an indi vidual under eighteen (18) years of age. SECTION 5. NEW LAW A new section of law to be codified in the Oklahoma Statutes as Section 26 07.5 of Title 63, unless there is created a duplication in numbering, reads as follows: A. Any referral for or provision of gender transiti on procedures to an individual u nder eighteen (18) years of age is unprofessional conduct and shall , upon an adverse ruling by the appropriate licensing board, result in immediate revocation of the license or certificate of the physician or othe r healthcare professional . B. 1. A person may assert a n actual or threatene d violation of this act as a claim or defense in a j udicial or admi nistrative proceeding and obtain compensatory damages, injunctive relief, declaratory relief, or any other appropriate relief. 2. A person shall bring a claim for a vi olation of this act no later than two (2) years after the day the cause of action accrue s. 3. An individual under eighteen (18) years of age may bring an action throughout their minority through a parent or next friend , and may bring an action in their o wn name upon reaching majority at Req. No. 1454 Page 10  any time from that point until twenty (20) years after reaching the age of majority. 4. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, an action under this subsection may be commenced, and relief may be granted, in a judicial proceeding without r egard to whether the person commencing the action h as sought or exh austed available administrative remedies. 5. In any action or proceeding to enforce a provision of this act, a prevailing party who establishes a violation of this act shall recover reason able attorney fe es. C. 1. The Attorney General ma y bring an actio n to enforce compliance with this act. 2. This act does not deny, impair, or otherwise affect any right or authority of the Attorney General, this state , or any agency, officer, or employe e of the state, acting under any law other than this act, to instit ute or intervene in any proceeding. SECTION 6. It being immediately necessary for the pr eservation of the public peace, health or safety, an emergency is hereby declared to exist, by reaso n whereof this act shall ta ke effect and be in full force from and after i ts passage and approval. 59-1-1454 DC 1/19/2023 10:08:29 AM Req. No. 5112 Page 1  STATE OF OKLAHOMA 1st Session of the 59th Legis lature (2023) HOUSE BILL 2177 By: West (Kevin) AS INTRODUCED An Act relating to public health and safe ty; defining terms; prohibiting certain health care professionals from performing o r attempting to perfor m gender transition procedur es; providing exceptions; prohibiting use of public funds for gender transition procedures; pro hibiting certain gender transition procedures; defining certain conduct as unprofessio nal; requiring revocation of lic ense or certificate ; prescribing statute of limitations for disciplin ary proceedings; authorizing certain claims or defenses; prescribing statute of limitations; authorizing civil acti ons by minors; authorizing civil actions after majority; authorizing cer tain actions withou t exhaustion of admini strative remedies; authorizi ng attorney fees; authorizing Attorney General to bring enforcement actions; prohibit ing state insurance program reimbursements; providing for construction of act; providing for codificat ion; and providing a n effective date. BE IT ENACTED BY THE P EOPLE OF THE STATE OF OKLAHOMA: SECTION 1. NEW LAW A new section of law to be codified in the Oklahoma Statutes as Section 2607 of Title 63, unless there is created a duplication in numbering, reads as follows: A. As used in this act: Req. No. 5112 Page 2  1. "Biological sex " means the biological indication of male and female in the con text of reprod uctive potential or capacity, su ch as sex chromosomes, naturally occur ring sex hormo nes, gonads, and nonambig uous internal and ext ernal genitalia present at birth, without regard to an individual's psychological, chosen, or subjective experience of gender ; 2. "Gender" means the psychological, behavioral, social , and cultural aspects of b eing male or fem ale; 3. "Health care professional " means a pers on who is licensed, certified , or otherwise authorized b y the laws of this state to administ er health care in the ordinary course of the p ractice of hi s or her profession ; 4. "Physician" means a person who is licensed in t his stat e to practice medicine; and 5. "Public fund s" means state, c ounty, or local government monies, in addition to any department, agency , or instrumenta lity authorized or appropr iated under stat e law or derived from any fund in which such mon ies are deposit ed. B. A physician , mental health professiona l, or other health care professional shall no t knowingly engage in or cause a ny of the following practices to be performed upon any person under eighteen (18) years of age if the practice is performed for th e purpose of attempting to alter the appearance of or affirm the minor's perception of h is or her gen der or sex, if that appearance o r Req. No. 5112 Page 3  perception is inconsistent with the minor's sex as defined in this act: 1. Prescribin g or administering puberty bloc king medication to stop or delay normal puberty ; 2. Prescribing or administering supraphysi ologic doses of testosterone or other androgens to female s; 3. Prescribing or administering supraphysiologic doses of estrogen to ma les; 4. Performing sterilization surgeries , including castration, vasectomy, hystere ctomy, oophorectomy, orchiectomy, and penectomy ; 5. Performing surgeries that artifi cially cons truct tissue with the appearance of genitalia that differs from the individ ual's sex, including metoidioplasty , phalloplasty, an d vaginoplasty ; or 6. Removing any healthy or non -diseased body part or tissue, except for a male circumcision. C. A physician, mental health professional, or other health care profess ional shall not knowingly engage in conduct that aid s or abets the practices described in subsec tion B of this section to any person under eighteen (18) years of age. This section m ay not be construed to impose liability on any speech or conduct protected by federal or s tate law. D. Subsections B and C of this act do not apply to: 1. Services to persons born with a medically veri fiable disorder of sex development, including a person with external Req. No. 5112 Page 4  biological sex characteristics that are irresolvably ambiguous, such as those born with 46 XX chromosomes with virilization, 46 XY chromosom es with un der-virilization, or having both ovar ian and testicul ar tissue ; 2. Services provided when a physician has otherwise diagn osed a disorder of sexual development that the physici an has determined , through genetic or biochemical testing , is caused by the person not having normal sex chromosomes structu re, sex steroid hormone production , or sex steroid hormo ne action; 3. Treatment of any infection, injury, dis ease, or disorder that has been caused by or exace rbated by the performance of gender transition proce dures, w hether or not the gender transition procedure was per formed in accordance with state and fede ral law or whether or not fund ing for the gender tran sition procedure is permissible under this act ; or 4. Any procedure undertaken because the individual suffers from a physical disorder, physical i njury, or physic al illness that would, as certified by a physician, place the individua l in imminent danger of death or impairment of major bodily function unle ss such procedure is performed . E. It shall be prohibited for any public funds to be directly or indirectly used, granted, paid , or distributed to any entity, organization , or individual who provides the services described in subsection B of this section to any minor or adult . No facility Req. No. 5112 Page 5  that receives p ublic funds shall allow its staff or facilities to be used to per form the services described in subsection s B of this act on any minor or adult. Any violation of this section shall result in the los s of public fu nding to the entity, organization , or individual for a minimum of one (1) year and shall not be reinstated until full compliance with this act . F. 1. Any violation of subsection B or C of this section shall be considered unprofessional conduct and shall, u pon an adverse ruling by the appropriate l icensing board, result in immediate revocation of the license or certificate of the physician , mental health prof essional, or other hea lth care professional . 2. Disciplinary proc eedings against the physician , mental health professional, or health care professional m ust be commence d not later than the date as of which the individual upon whom the services described in subsection B of this section were perf ormed attains forty-five (45) years of age. 3. A person may ass ert an actual or t hreatened violation of this act as a claim or defense in a judi cial or administ rative proceeding and obtain compensatory damages, injunctive relief, declaratory re lief, or any other appropriate relief. 4. A person shall bring a claim for a violation of thi s act no later than the date of which the individual upon whom the services described in subsec tion B of this section were per formed attains forty-five (45) years of age. Req. No. 5112 Page 6  5. An individual under eighteen (18) years of age may bring an action throughout his or her minority through a parent or next friend, and may bring an ac tion in his or her own name upon reaching majority at any time from that point until twenty-seven (27) years after reaching the age of majority. 6. The Attorney General m ay bring an action to enforce compliance wi th this act. Nothing in this act shall be construe d to deny, impair, or otherwise affe ct any right o r authority o f the Attorney General, the state, or a ny agency, officer, or employee of the state to insti tute or intervene in any action or proceeding. 7. In any actio n or proc eeding to enforce a provision of this act, a prevailing party who est ablishes a violation of this act shall recover reasonable atto rney fees. G. Insurance covera ge for the services described in subsections B and C of this section performed within this state on any minor or adult shall be prohibited. 1. A health benefit plan und er an in surance policy o r other plan provi ding health care coverage in this state shall not include reimbursement for the services described in subsections B and C of this section whether performed on a minor or a dult. 2. A health benefit plan under an insurance polic y or other plan providing health care coverage in this state i s not required to provide coverage for the servic es described in s ubsections B of this act whether performed on a minor or a dult. Req. No. 5112 Page 7  H. To the extent the state or any private party is enjoined from enforcing any part or applic ation of this act, all other par ts or applications of that subsection and all other subsections are severable a nd enforceable. It is the Legislature 's intent that any lawful subsection, application, or part of a subsection re main enforcea ble no matt er the number of subsections, parts of subsections, or applications deemed unenforce able. Under no circumst ance should a court c onclude t he Legislature intended that the state or private party be enjoined from enforci ng any subsection, appl ication, or p art of a subsection not deeme d independently unenforceable. SECTION 2. This act shall be come effective November 1, 2023. 59-1-5112 TJ 01/18/23 MISSISSIPPI LEGISLATURE 2023 Regular Session To: Judiciary A By: Representative Ford (73rd) House Bill 1074 AN ACT TO ENACT THE TITLE IX PRESERVATION ACT; TO PROVIDE INTERPRETATION AND CLARIFICATION OF CERTAIN TERMS RELATING TO TITLE IX OF THE FEDERAL CODE; TO STATE LEGISLATIVE INTENT; TO CLARIFY TERMS FOR THE PURPOSES OF STATE LAW; TO PROVIDE THAT POLICIES AND LAWS THAT DISTINGUISH BETWEEN THE SEXES ARE SUBJECT TO INTERMEDIATE CONSTITUTIONAL SCRUTINY; TO REQUIRE ANY PUBLIC SCHOOL, SCHOOL DISTRICT, STATE OR LOCAL AGENCY, DEPARTMENT OR OFFICE THAT COLLECTS VITAL STATISTICS FOR THE PURPOSE OF COMPLYING WITH ANTI-DISCRIMINATION LAWS OR FOR THE PURPOSE OF GATHERING ACCURATE PUBLIC HEALTH, CRIME, ECONOMIC OR OTHER DATA TO IDENTIFY EACH INDIVIDUAL WHO IS PART OF THE COLLECTED DATA SET AS EITHER MALE OR FEMALE AT BIRTH; AND FOR RELATED PURPOSES. BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF MISSISSIPPI: SECTION 1. This act shall be known and may be cited as "The Title IX Preservation Act." SECTION 2. The Legislature finds and declares that: (a) Males and females possess unique and immutable biological differences that manifest prior to birth and increase as they age and experience puberty; (b) Biological differences between the sexes mean that only females are able to get pregnant, give birth and breastfeed children; (c) Biological differences between the sexes mean that males are, on average, bigger, stronger, and faster than females; (d) Biological differences between the sexes leave females more physically vulnerable than males to specific forms of violence, including sexual violence; (e) Females have historically suffered from discrimination in education, athletics and employment; (f) Biological differences between the sexes are enduring and may, in some circumstances, warrant the creation of separate social, educational, athletic, or other spaces in order to ensure safety and/or to allow members of each sex to succeed and thrive; (g) Inconsistencies in court rulings and policy initiatives with respect to the definitions of "sex," "male," "female," "man," and "woman" have led to the endangerment of single-sex spaces and resources, thereby necessitating clarification of certain terms. SECTION 3. For the purposes of state law: (a) A person's "sex" is defined as his or her biological sex (either male or female) at birth; (b) A "female" is an individual whose biological reproductive system is developed to produce ova; a "male" is an individual whose biological reproductive system is developed to fertilize the ova of a female; (c) The terms "woman" and "girl" refer to human females, and the terms "man" and "boy" refer to human males; and (d) The term "mother" is defined as a parent of the female sex, and the term "father" is defined as a parent of the male sex. SECTION 4. There are legitimate reasons to distinguish between the sexes with respect to athletics, prisons, or other detention facilities, domestic violence shelters, rape crisis centers, locker rooms, restrooms, and other areas where biology, safety and/or privacy are implicated. SECTION 5. Policies and laws that distinguish between the sexes are subject to intermediate constitutional scrutiny which forbids unfair discrimination against similarly-situated males and females but allows the law to distinguish between the sexes where such distinctions are substantially related to important governmental objectives. SECTION 6. Any public school or school district and any state or local agency, department, or office that collects vital statistics for the purpose of complying with anti-discrimination laws or for the purpose of gathering accurate public health, crime, economic or other data shall identify each individual who is part of the collected data set as either male or female at birth. SECTION 7. (1) Any person employed by any public school, school district, state or local agency, department or office shall not be required to address any other employee or student enrolled with such entity by any pronoun, salutation, greeting, or other terminology that is inconsistent with that person's sex as defined herein. (2) A public school, school district, state or local agency, department or office shall not be required to permit an employee or student to dress in a manner inconsistent with professional standards of dress generally prevailing in the community for persons of the same sex, as defined herein, of that person or student. SECTION 8. This act shall take effect and be in force from and after July 1, 2023. Req. No. 1625 Page 1  STATE OF OKLAHOMA 1st Session of the 59th Legislature (2023) SENATE BILL 937 By: Jett AS INTRODUCED An Act relating to schools; creating the School Establishment Clause Act (SECA); providi ng short title; defining terms; provid ing process t o establish a student ’s biological sex; prohibiting a public school from creating , enforcing, or endorsing certai n policies; prohibiting a public school from certain activities to create, enforce, or endo rse certain policies; prohibiting the enforcement of certain policies or statutes; allowing certain civil action and establishin g awards; directing that public school officials that commit certain violations be decla red in violation of certain oath and subj ected to certain relief; allowing for the dismissal of school officials and officers and state employees who knowingly com mit certain violation and directing that they be declared in violation of certain oath; prohibiting certain defense; prohibiting a public school from certain discrimination; allowing ce rtain civil action and establishing awards; providing for affirmative defense; providing for certain construction of act; providing for severability; providing cert ain legislative recognition; providing for codification; providing for noncodif ication; providing an effective date; and declaring an emergency . BE IT ENACTED BY THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF OKLAHOMA: Req. No. 1625 Page 2  SECTION 1. NEW LAW A new section of law to be codified in the Oklahoma Statutes as Section 1-126 of Title 70, unless there is created a duplication in numb ering, reads as follows: This act shall be known and may be cited as the “School Establishment Clause Act (SECA) ”. SECTION 2. NEW LAW A ne w section of law to be codified in the Oklahoma Sta tutes as Section 1-127 of Title 70, unless there is created a duplication in numb ering, reads as follows: As used in the School Establishment Clause Act (SECA) : 1. “Biological female ” means a female perso n, a woman, or a girl who was born with female anat omy and with two (2) X chromosomes in the person ’s cells; 2. “Biological male ” means a male person, a man, or a boy who was born with male anatomy and with X and Y chromosomes in the person’s cells; 3. “Coed” means a sports activity designation that perm issibly involves biologica l males and biological females for secular and neutral purposes, not to advance a religious worldview ; 4. “Contemporary community standards of decency ” means standards based on the reasonable observer perspective which are violated by appeals to the prurie nt interest or the patently offensive to the extent the appeals harm the general decency, safety, health, and welfare of the community. Acts of licentiousness shall be consider ed antithetical to this standard ; Req. No. 1625 Page 3  5. “Drag queen st ory time” means a non -secular event where men dress up as women and display an inherently sexualized performance targeting minors with the purpose of promoting and normalizing the faith-based beliefs and practices that stem from the secular humanist religi on. Drag queen story time shall include but not be limited to an event that targets children and promotes licentiousness in attempts to justify practices inconsistent with the peace or safety of the stat e from the reasonable observer perspective ; 6. “Emotional appeal ” means a method of persuasion through sentiment, not logic, designed to cre ate an emotional response to achieve certain ends ; 7. “Gender identity ” means a faith-based construct, like the sexual orientation orthodoxy, that stems from the reli gion of secular humanism. Gender identity includes the belief that a person is the gender that they self-identify as or that they feel they are in the moment and may be used interchangeably with the term sexual orientation ; 8. “Lemon test ” means a three -prong test originally created by the United States Supreme Court and adopted by this state which is used to determine whether government action is unconstitutional under the Establishment Clause of the First Amendment to the United States Constitution. Government action violates the Establishment Clause and Article II, Section 5 of the Oklahoma Con stitution if the Req. No. 1625 Page 4  action fails to satisfy any of the prongs. The test requires that state action or governmen t policy: a. have a valid secular purpose , b. not have the effect of advancing, endorsing, or inhibiting religion , and c. not foster excessive entan glement with a particular religion ; 9. “Logical nexus ” means at least some minimal, relevant, legitimate, i mportant, or rational connection and connotes a low - threshold standard ; 10. “Non-secular ” means faith -based, not proven, predicated on naked as sertions, or emotional feelings, not self -evident objective fact; 11. “Non-secular self-asserted sex -based iden tity narrative ” means an unproven faith -based identi ty that is implicitly religious and is not predicated on self -evident neutral truth and is a story that provides the individual with a sense of purpose and serves as a commentary on sexual practices, sexu al preference, faith, morality, and life. The term shall include but not be limited to expressions and speech that are often controversial, sexualized, questionably moral, questionably plausible, and have a tendency to erode community standards of decency and promote licentiousness ; 12. “Promote ” means to advocate for, assist with, encourage, or popularize through advertising or publicity ; Req. No. 1625 Page 5  13. “Public school” means a public educational institution that is maintained at public expense for the education of the children of a community or district and that constitutes a part of a system of free public education including primary and secondary schools from grades prekindergarten through twelve . The term shall include accredited nonpublic educational instituti ons including primary and secondary schools f rom grades prekindergarten through twelve; 14. “Reasonable observer ” means a person of ordinary prudence who views a policy or action from an objective standard point in the context of the state’s longstanding practice and through the lens of self-evident neutral, natural, and non -controversial transcultural morality ; 15. “Religion ” means a set of unproven answers to the greater questions like “why are we here, ” “what should we be doi ng as humans, ” “how do we g et our identity, ” and “what happens after death.” The term means a closed system and group or community that is organized, full, and provides a comprehensive code by which individuals may guide their daily activities. Religion includes an ultimate concern or sincere belief and can be non -theistic or theistic; 16. “Secular humanism ” means a faith -based worldview that is also referred to as postmodern -western-individualistic moral relativism, expressive individualism, or antitheism and is often the mirror o pposite of theism. The term refers to a reli gion that Req. No. 1625 Page 6  worships man as the source of all knowledge and truth. The term includes a belief system that is centered on the unproven assumptions that there are no moral absolutes and no one mo ral doctrine should be used as the superior basis for law and policy, except for the religious doctrines of secular humanism. The term includes a series of unproven faith -based assumptions and naked assertions that suggest that morality and truth are man -made conventions and that at the heart of liberty is man ’s ability to define his own meaning of the universe. The term refers to a religion that tends to promote licentiousness and to justify practices that are inconsistent with the peace and safety of the state. The term r efers to the belief that man is merely a bundle o f chemicals, animated pieces of meat, or accidental particles, that nature is all there is, and that there is nothing after death. Nonsecular self -asserted sex -based identity narratives and sexual orientati on orthodoxy are doctrines that are inseparably l inked to secular humanism . The term includes but is not limited to a religion that has many different denominational sects and is expressed in widely varying ways ; 17. “Sexual orientation ” means a person ’s sexual identity or self-identification as homose xual, lesbian, or transgender. The term means a mythology, dogma, doctrine, ideology, or orthodoxy that is inseparably linked to the religion of secular humanism. The term includes non -secular self -asserted sex-based identity narratives Req. No. 1625 Page 7  that are often pr edicated on a series of unproven faith -based assumptions and naked assertions that are implicitly religious and have a tendency to erode community standards of decency and promote licentiousness. The term may be used interc hangeably with gender identity, given that they are both faith -based sexual commentaries on morality that come from secular humanism ; and 18. “Taxpayer standing ” means the standing of a taxpayer to file a lawsuit against a government acto r that is directly or symbolically engaging in pr actices that violate the Establishment Clause of the First Amendment to the United States Constitution or Article II, Section 5 of the Oklahoma Constitution after the government actor actually or prospective ly engaged in acti on that potentially failed at l east one prong of the lemon test. A taxpayer shall have a logical nexus to a government actor ’s violation to assert taxpayer standing. A person who pays sales tax in this state can successfully assert this form of standing before the courts of competent jurisdiction. SECTION 3. NEW LAW A new section of law to be codified in the Oklahoma Statutes as Section 1-128 of Title 70, unless there is created a duplication in numb ering, reads a s follows: If the biological sex of a student is di sputed, the student may establish the student ’s sex by presenting a signed statement by a licensed physician that indicates the student ’s sex based solely upon all o f the following factors : Req. No. 1625 Page 8  1. The student ’s internal and external reproductive anatomy ; 2. The student ’s normal, endogenously produced levels of testosterone; and 3. An analysis of the student ’s genetic makeup. SECTION 4. NEW LAW A new se ction of law to be codified in the Oklahoma Statutes as Section 1-129 of Title 70, unless there is created a duplication in numb ering, reads as follows: A. Pursuant to the Establishment Clause of th e First Amendment of the United States Constitution and Article II, Section 5 of the Oklahoma Constitution, a public school is prohibited fro m creating, enforcing, or endorsing a policy that respects, favors, endorses, or promotes n on-secular self -asserted sex-based identity narratives or sexual orientation orthodoxy because such policies fail the lemon test for: 1. Constituting non -secular sh ams that lack a primary secular purpose; 2. Cultivating indefensible legal weapons against non-observers of the re ligion of secular humanism; and 3. Having the effect of excessively entangling the govern ment with the religion of secular humanism. B. Pursuant to the First Amendment to and the Establishment Clause of the United States Constitut ion, Article II, Section 5 of the Oklahoma Constitution, and the state ’s compelling interest to discourage licenti ousness, a public school shall not create or Req. No. 1625 Page 9  enforce a policy that respects, endorses, favors, or promotes non - secular self -asserted sex -based identity narratives or sexual orientation orthodoxy by: 1. Exposing students to curriculum concerning non -secular self- asserted sex -based identity ideology or sexu al orientation orthodoxy unless the curriculum is part of a sex education program and only after a student ’s parent or legal guardian has: a. intentionally opted their child into participating in the curriculum in writing , and b. received a notification from the school district or the State Department of Education that the messaging could expose their child to licentiousness and one particular religious worldvi ew; 2. Permitting biological male students to participate in sports designated for biological fem ale students , as prohibited by Section 27-106 of Title 70 of the Oklahoma Statutes ; 3. Permitting biological female students to participate in sports designated for biological male students; 4. Permitti ng biological male students to enter or use a locker room or restroom designated for biological female students , as prohibited by Sec tion 1-125 of Title 70 of the Ok lahoma Statutes ; 5. Permitting biological female students to enter or use a locker room or restroom designated for biological male students , as prohibited by Section 1 -125 of Title 70 of the Ok lahoma Statutes ; Req. No. 1625 Page 10  6. Mandating non-obvious pronoun changes that respect gender identity ideology and sexual orientation orthodoxy; or 7. Hosting or spon soring drag queen story time for children or similar programming at a public school. C. Pursuant to the First Amendment to and the Establishment Clause of the United States Consti tution, Article II, Section 5 of the Oklahoma Constitution, and the state ’s compelling interest to discourage licentiousness, al l policies or statutes that violate subsections A or B of this section shall no t be enforced by any school of ficial, executive or judicial officer , or any other agent of the state. D. The following perso ns may enforce subsection A or B of this section in a civil court of competent jurisdiction: 1. A taxpayer of this state or a poli tical subdivision of this state that has taxpayer standing; 2. A parent or legal guardian who pays taxes in this state and who has a student in a public school that has violate d subsection A or B and has taxpayer standing; and 3. A public school employee who is disciplined by a public school for refusing to promote non-secular self -asserted sex -based identity narratives or sexu al orien tation orthodoxy. E. A plaintiff who bring s a civil action against a public school for violating subsection A or B of this section may seek and be awarded the following by a court of competent jurisdiction: Req. No. 1625 Page 11  1. Attorney fees and costs; 2. Actual damages; 3. Injunctive relief; and 4. Other forms of equitable relief deemed appropriate. F. All public school officia ls that violate subsection A or B of this section may be declared to be in violation of their oath of office established under Article VI, Clause 3 of the United States Constitution and subjected to declaratory relief for a violation in a court of competen t jurisdiction. G. A school official, officer, or employee of the state who knowingly violates subsection A or B of this section may b e dismissed from the person ’s office or position, a nd the person ’s employment may be terminated immediately. H. All publ ic school officials that violate subsection A or B of this section may be declared to be in violation of their oath of office establish ed under Article VI , Clause 3 of the United States Constitution and subjected to declaratory relief for such a violation in a court of competent jurisdiction. I. Sincerity of belief o r emotional appeals may not constitute a valid defense for a violation u nder subsection A or B of this section. SECTION 5. NEW LAW A new section of law to be codified in the Oklahoma Statutes as Section 1-130 of Title 70, unless there is created a duplication in numb ering, reads as follows: Req. No. 1625 Page 12  A. Pursuant to the Free Exercise Clause of the First Amendment to the United States Constitution and Article II, Section 5 of the Oklahoma Constitution, a public school shall not discriminate against any person for believing in or for failing to believe in the plausibility of non-secular self -asserted sex -based ident ity narratives or sexual orientation orthodoxy. B. A student or teacher who experiences discrimination by a public school as described in subsection A of this section shall have standing to file suit in a court of competent jurisdiction where they can see k: 1. Injunctive relief; 2. Declaratory relief; 3. Attorney f ees and costs; 4. Actual damages; and 5. Other forms of relief. C. It shall be an absolute and affirmative defense in a civil action broug ht pursuant to subsection A of this se ction that th e public school was acting in compliance with the Establishment Clause of and the First Amendment to the United States Constitution or Article II, Section 5 of the Oklahoma Constitution , or other existing state and federal laws in undertaking the challenge d action. Req. No. 1625 Page 13  SECTION 6. NEW LAW A new section of law to be codified in the Oklahoma Statutes as Section 1-131 of Title 70, unless there is created a duplication in numb ering, reads as follows: A. The School Establishment Clause Act (S ECA) is constructed on the premise that: 1. The United States is a constitutional republic of which the State of Oklahoma is a part; 2. The United States Cons titution is the supreme sovereign law of this country that preempts all state and federal law; 3. The First Amendment to the United States Constitution applies to the states through the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution; 4. The Establishment Clause of the First Amendment to the United States Constitution and Article II, Section 5 of the Oklahoma Constitution wer e not merely designed to prevent the state from respecting and promoting the doctrines of institutionalized religions but tho se of non -institutionalized religions ; 5. All members of the Legislature and all executive and judicial officers are b ound by oath or affirmation pursuant to Article VI, Clause 3 of the United States Constitution to not create or enforce policies that vi olate the Establishment Clause or the Free Exercise Clause of the First Amendment to the United S tates Constitution regard less of the member ’s or officer ’s party affiliation or personal religious beliefs; Req. No. 1625 Page 14  6. The Establishment Clause balanced with the Free Exercise Clause of the First Amendment to the United States Constitution is the controlling constitutional authority in in forming this state on how to respond and react to self -asserted sex -based identity narratives and sexual orientation orthodox y and the Equal Protection and substantive Due Process clauses of the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution have no applicability; 7. Emotional appeals shall not be used to usurp the Establishment Clause of the First Amendment to the United States Constitution or Article II, Section 5 of the Oklahoma Constitution in an effort to justify the government’s creation or enforcement of policies that respect non -secular self -asserted sex -based identity narratives or sexual orientation orthodoxy; 8. All policies put forth by public schools that resp ect or recognize non-secular self -asserted sex -based identity narratives and sexual orientation orthodoxy fail the lemon test first established by the United States Supreme Court and are thereby preempted by the Establishment Clause of the First Amendment to the United States Constitution and Article II, S ection 5 of the Oklahoma Constitution in their making and enforcement and shall be enjoined from enforcement because the policies: a. constitute n on-secular shams that lack a primary secular purpose; Req. No. 1625 Page 15  b. cultivate indefensible legal weapons against non- observers of the religion of secular humanism; and c. have the effect of excessively entangling the government with the religion of secular h umanism; 9. The Legislature recognizes that in the wake of the deci sions by the United States Supreme Court that force d the state ’s entanglemen t with the religion of secular humanism, there has been no rush on non -secular marriage, but there has been a rush on: a. public schools and public libraries by devout secular humanists for the sole purpose of targeting and indoctrinating minors wi th the licentious religion of secular humanism with the government ’s stamp of approval at the taxpayers ’ expense, and b. the social marginalization and systematic persecution of non-observers of the religion of secular humanism; 10. The Legislature recognizes that it is not proven or disproven whether sexual orientation is predicated on immutability and genetics an d is, therefore, a matter of religious faith that falls within the exclusive jurisdiction of the Establishment Clause balanced with the Free Exercise Clause of the First Amendment to the United States Constitution and Article I I, Section 5 of the Oklahoma Constitution; and 11. This state shall be particularly vigilant in monitori ng compliance with the Establishment Clause of the United States Req. No. 1625 Page 16  Constitution in the public school context to protect minors from religious indoctrination with the government ’s stamp of approval, especially when th at religious ideology promotes licentiousn ess. B. SECA shall not be construe d as prohibiting students or teachers from believing in or from ref using to believe in the plausibility of non -secular self -asserted sex -based identity narratives or sexual orient ation orthodoxy or secular humanist practices because such beliefs and practi ces are protected under the Free Exercise Clause of the First Amendment to the United States Constitution and under Article II, Section 5 of the Oklahoma Constitution . SECA shall be constructed on the premise that protections of religious practices under the Free Exercise Clause of the First Amendment to the United States Constitution and Article II, Section 5 of the Oklahoma Constitution are not absolute, and this state is author ized to regulate or prohibit certain relig ious practices pursuant to its inhe rent police powers afforded u nder the Tenth Amendment to the United States Constitution if those practices promote licentiousness or are inconsistent with the peace and safety of the state. The Legislature recognizes tha t it is self-evident that non -secular self-asserted sex-based identity narratives and sexual orie ntation orthodoxy promote licentiousness and attempt s to justify practices are inconsistent with the peace and safety of this state. Req. No. 1625 Page 17  SECTION 7. NEW LAW A new section of l aw to be codified in the Oklahoma Statutes as Section 1-132 of Title 70, unless there is created a duplication in numb ering, reads as follows: If any section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, clause, phrase, or word of the School Establish ment Clause Act (SECA) is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid, the holding shall n ot affect the constitutionality or validity of the remaining portions of SECA, the Legislature hereby declaring that it would have passed this and each and eve ry section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, clause, phrase, and word thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more other sections, subsections, paragraphs, subparagraphs, sentences, clauses, phrase s, or words hereof may be declared to be unconstitutional, invalid, or otherwise ineffective. SECTION 8. NEW LAW A new section of law not to be codified in the Oklahoma Statutes reads as follows: The Legislature hereby recognizes the following findings : 1. The Unite d States Constitution is not silent as to how this state shall respond and react to lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and questioning (LGBTQ) issues and sexual orientation orthodoxy for the matters are addressed exclus ively by the Establishment Clause and Free Exercise Clause of the First Amendment to the United States Constitution, not the substan tive Due Process Req. No. 1625 Page 18  Clause or Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution, which have no applicability; 2. The Establishment Clause of the First Amendment to the United States Constitution states that the government “shall make no law respecting an estab lishment of religion ,” and Article II, Section 5 of the Oklahoma Constitution states, “Public money or property - Use for sectarian purposes. No public money or property shall ever be appropriated, applied, donated, o r used, directly or indirectly, for th e use, benefit, or support of any sect, church, denomination, or system of religion, o r for the use, benefit, or support of any priest, preacher, minister, or other religious teacher or dignitary, or sectarian institut ion as such ”; 3. The Free Exercise Clause of the First Amendment to the United States Constitution states that the governme nt “shall make no law...prohibiting the free exercise [of religion] ”; 4. The Establishment Clause of the First Amendment to the United States Constit ution applies to this state through the Fourteenth A mendment, and the United States Supreme Court held in Hein v. Freedom From Religion Found ation Inc., 551 U.S. 587 (2007) that the Establishment Clause applies to the executive branch, which includes Oklahoma ’s public schools; 5. The Establishment Clause of the United States Constitution was never solely desi gned to prohibit the government from res pecting Req. No. 1625 Page 19  and recognizing the doctrines of institutionalized religions but of non-institutionalized religions, such as secular humanism; 6. The United States Supreme Court found that secular humanism is a religion for the purposes of the First Amendment in: a. Torcaso v. Watkins, 367 U.S. 488 (1961) , b. School District of A bington Township, P a. v. Schempp, 374 U.S. 203 (1963) , c. United States v. Seeger, 380 US 163 (1 965), and d. Welsh v. United States, 398 U.S. 333 (1 970); 7. Most of the United States cou rts of appeals have found that secular humanism is a religion for purposes of th e First Amendment in cases such as: a. Malnak v. Yogi, 592 F.2d 197 (3d Cir.1979) , b. Theriault v. Silber, 547 F.2d 1279 (5th Cir.1977) , c. Thomas v. Review Bd., 450 U.S. 707 ( 1981), d. Lindell v. McCallum, 352 F.3d 1107 (7th Cir.2003) , e. Real Alternatives, Inc. v. Sec ’y Dep’t of Health & Human Servs.,150 F.Supp. 3d 419, 2017 WL3324690 (3d Cir. Aug.4, 2017) , and f. Wells v. City and County of Denver, 257 F.3d 1132 (10th Cir. 20 01); 8. Several former self -identified homosexual activ ists, medical experts, licensed ministers, and persecuted Christians have testified under oath that non -secular self -asserted sex -based Req. No. 1625 Page 20  identity narratives, such as homosexuality and transgenderism, a nd sexual orientation orthodoxy are doctrines, ideologie s, and dogmas that are part of a worldview consisting of a series of unproven faith-based assumptions and naked asserti ons that are implicitly religious and inse parably linked to the religion of secul ar humanism; 9. The LGBTQ community is centered on a “closed system ” that is organized, full, and provides a comprehensive code by which individuals may guide their daily acti vities, making LGBTQ secular humanism a r eligion in view of the legal definition of what constitutes a religion provided by the courts i n cases such as United States v. Seeger, 380 US 163 (1965); Welsh v. United States, 398 U.S. 333 (1970); and Real Alternativ es, Inc. v. Sec ’y Dep’t of Health & H uman Servs.,150 F. Supp. 3d 419 (3d Cir. Au g. 4,2017); 10. Instead of having a cross, the Ten Commandments, or the star and crescent, the LGBTQ secular humanist religion has the rainbow-colored flag to symbolize its rel igious beliefs, practices, and value s; 11. The beliefs that a person “was born with a gay gene ” or “was born in the wrong body ” and is thereby entitled to special treatment amounts to a series of unproven faith -based assumptions and naked assertions that are implicitly religious and cannot be used as the basis for law and policy bec ause the Establishment Req. No. 1625 Page 21  Clause prohibits such beliefs fro m being legally promoted, endorsed, or respected by government; 12. Regardless of political affiliation, all members of the Legislature and all executive an d judicial officers are bound by oath to pu t their own political and religious beliefs aside and to comply with their duty to honor their oath of office pursuant to Article VI , Clause 3 to uphold the United States Constitution and to, therefore, immediatel y stop creating, respecting, and enforcing policies that promote the plausibility of non -secular se lf-asserted sex-based identity narratives and sexual orientation orthodoxy because all of those policies fail all three prongs of the lemon test established by the United States Supreme Court in Lemon v. Kurtzman, 403 U.S. 602 (1971) for: a. constituti ng non-secular shams that lack a primary secular purpose , b. cultivating indefensible legal weapons against non - observers of the religion of secular humanism , and c. serving to excessively entangle the go vernment with the religion of secular humani sm; 13. The United States Supreme Court in Edwards v. Aguillard, 482 U.S. 578 (1987) and Agostini v. Felton, 521 U.S. 203 (199 7) found that if government action fails o ne prong of the lemon test, it is unconstit utional, and the evidence shows that the enf orcement and creation of policies that respect non -secular self -asserted sex - Req. No. 1625 Page 22  based identity narratives or sexual orientation id eology fail all three prongs of the lemon test; 14. The United States Supreme Court in Lee v. Weisman, 505 U.S. 577 (1992) found that there are “heightened concerns with protecting freedom of conscience from subtle coercive pressure in the elementary and s econdary public schools, ” while also hold ing in Edwards v. Aguillard, 482 U.S. 578 ( 1987) that the government “should be particu larly vigilant in monitoring compliance with the Establishment Clause in the public -school context, ” when minors are subjected t o religious indoctrination with the perce ption of the government ’s stamp of approval ; 15. The federal courts have held in cases like Holloman v. Harland, 370 F.3 1252 (11th Cir. 2004) that neither emotional appeals nor sincerity of belief can be used to usurp the Establishment Clause of the First Amendment and all policies that respect a nd promote non-secular self -asserted sex -based identity narratives and sexual orientation orthodoxy have been based on a series of emotional appeals at the expense of this principle; 16. The Supreme Court in Ober gefell v. Hodges, 135 S.Ct. 2584 (2015), Uni ted States v. Windsor, 133 S. Ct. 2675 (2013 ), and Bostock v. Clayton Cnty. Bd. of Commissioners, 139 S.Ct. 1599 (2019) misapplied the Fourteenth A mendment through an unpri ncipled ploy and issued decisions that w ere based solely on a series of emotional Req. No. 1625 Page 23  appeals as a way to get around the Establishme nt Clause of the First Amendment to the United States Constitution; 17. In the wake of Obergefell v. Hodges,135 S.Ct. 2584 (201 5), United States v. Windsor, 133 S. Ct. 2675 (2013), and Bostock v. Clayton Cnty. B d. of Commissioners, 139 S.Ct. 1599 (2019), there has not been the promised equality, tolerance, and unity, but instead there has been division, domination by secular huma nists, the proliferation of moral superio rity complexes by moral relativists, cancel culture, the erosion of the integrity of the legal basis supporting the race -based civil rights movement which is objectively based on immutability, increased sexual explo itation and licentiousness, the prolifera tion of sexual confusion amongst minors, and the marginalization and even violent oppres sion of non - observers of the religion of secular humanism, demonstrating that those decisions amount to some of the greatest no n-secular shams since the inception of Am erican jurisprudence; 18. The United States Supreme Court’s position in INS v. Chada, 462 U.S. 919 (1983) and Nixon v. U.S., 506 U.S. 224 (1993) emphasized that the legislative branch shall serve as a check on the judicial and exe cutive branch, and by ena cting the School Establishment Clause Act (S ECA), the legislature shall be fulfilling that duty; 19. The United States Supreme Court held in Seminole Tribe of Fla. v. South Carolina, 517 U.S. 44 (1996) and in St. Joseph Stoc k Req. No. 1625 Page 24  Yards Co. v. United States, 2 98 U.S. 38 (1936) that “Stare Decisis is at its weakest when the Supreme Court interpret s the Constitution because its decisions can be altered only by constitutional amendment or by overruling prior decisions ”; 20. Obergefel l v. Hodges, 135 S.Ct. 2584 (2 015), United States v. Windsor, 133 S. Ct. 26 75 (2013), and Bostock v. Clayton Cnty. Bd. of Commissioners, 139 S.Ct. 1599 (2019) merely involved constitutional interpretation which means that Stare Decisis is at its weakest inv olving those decisions; 21. The United States Supreme Court in Cooper Ind ustries, Inc. v. Aviall Services, Inc. 543 U .S. 157 (2004) stated that “[constitutional] questions which merely lurk in the record, neither brought to [the] attention of the court nor ruled upon, are not to be considered as having been so decided as to con stitute precedents; ” 22. In Bostock v. Clay ton Cnty. Bd. of Commissioners, 139 S.Ct. 1599 (2019), Obergefell v. Hodges, 135 S.Ct. 2584 (2015) , and United States v. Windsor, 133 S. Ct. 2675 (2013), the controlli ng applicability of the Establishment Clause of the First Amendment to the United States Constitution regarding sexual orientation orthodoxy was lurking in the shadows of those cases but not decided upon by the Supreme Court, whic h means that Stare Decisis does not apply, and those cases are subjecte d to being overruled for being framed on the wrong constitutional narrative; Req. No. 1625 Page 25  23. The United States Supreme Court has repeatedly held that the states have a compelling interest to uphold community standards of decency, to discourage licentiousness, and to enact policies that stop attempts to justify practices that are inconsistent with the peace and safety of the state, as underscored by the state ’s inherent police powers in the Tenth Amendment to the United Stat es Constitution; 24. The United States Supre me Court found in Ginsberg v. New York, 390 U.S. 629 (1968) and Mishkin v. State of New York, 383 U.S. 502 (1966) that “to simply adjust the definition of obscenity to social realities ha s always failed to be pe rsuasive before the Courts of the United Stat es”, and such adjustments fail to be persuasive to this state ; 25. Courts, in cases like Schlegel v. United States, 416 F. 2d 1372 (Ct. Cl. 1969), have held as a matter of self -evident observation that “any schoolboy knows that a homosexual act is immoral, in decent, lewd, and obscene. Adult persons are even more conscious that this is true ”; 26. A public school policy that permits self -identified transvestites who are biological males to participate in sports for biological females in an attemp t to show resp ect to their non - secular self -asserted sex -based identity narrative fails the three prongs of the lemon test by a landslide, promotes licentiousness, erodes community standards of decency, and is an attempt to justify Req. No. 1625 Page 26  practices that are incon sistent with t he peace and safety of the state; 27. The United States Supreme Court decision in Bostock v. Clayton Cnty. Bd. of Commissioners, 139 S.Ct. 1599 (2019) was invalid because requiring that “sexual orientation ” be read into the term “sex” in Title VIII, 42 U. S.C. §2000e–2(a)(1) causes th e statute to lack a primary secular purpose and excessively entangles the government with the religion of secular humanism as advocated by the LGBTQ denominatio n; 28. Males and females are self -evidently differ ent but equal as implicated by the following neutral and secular considerations: a. according to the United States Supreme Court in United States v. Virginia, 518 U.S. 515, 533 (1996), there are “inherent d ifferences betwee n men and women, ” and these diffe rences “remain c ause for celebration, but not for denigration of the members of either sex or for artificial constraints on an individual ’s opportunity ”, b. these “inherent differences ” range from chromosom al and hormonal d ifferences to physiological diffe rences, c. according to Neel Burt on, “The Battle of the Sexes, ” 33 Psychology Today (July 2, 2012), men generally have “denser, stronger bones, tendons, and ligaments ” and Req. No. 1625 Page 27  “larger hearts, greater lung volum e per body mass, a higher red blood cell count, an d higher hemoglo bin”, d. according to Doriane Lambelet Coleman, “Sex in Sport ”, Law and Contemporary Problems 63 -126 (2017) (quoting Gina Kolata, “Men, Women 2 and Speed. Words: Got Testosterone? ”, N.Y. Tim es (Aug. 21, 2008 )), men also have higher natural levels of testos terone, which affects traits such as hemoglobin levels, body fat content, the storage and use of carbohydrates, and the development of type 2 muscle fibers, all of which result in men being able to generate higher speed and power during phy sical activity , e. the biological differences between men and women, especially related to natural levels of testosterone, explains the male and female secondary sex characteristics which develop during puberty and have life-long effects, including those m ost important fo r success in sport: categorically different strength, speed, and endurance, according to Doriane Lambelet Coleman and Wickliffe Shreve, “Comparing Athletic Performances: The Best Elite Women to Boys and Men, ” Duke Law Center for Sports Law and Policy , f. while classifications based on sex are generally disfavored, the United States Supreme Court in United Req. No. 1625 Page 28  States v. Virginia, 518 U.S. 515, 533 (1996), recognized that “sex classifications may be used to compensate women for particular economic disabilities [they have] suffered, promote equal employment opportunity, [and] to advance full development of the talent and capacities of our Nation ’s people ”, g. one place where sex classifications allow for the “full development of the talent and capac ities of our Nation’s people ” is in the context of sports and athletics , h. courts have recognized that the inherent, physiological differences between males and females result in different athletic ca pabilities. For example, Kleczek v. Rhode Island Inter scholastic 26 League, Inc., 612 A.2d 734, 738 (R.I. 1992) ( “Because of innate physiological differences, boys and girls are not similarly situated as they enter athletic competition. ”); Petrie v. I ll. High Sch. Ass ’n, 394 N.E.2d 855, 861 (Ill. App. Ct. 197 9) (noting tha t “high school boys [generally possess physiological advantages over] their girl counterparts ” and that those advantages give them an unfair lead over girls in some sports like “high school track ”), Req. No. 1625 Page 29  i. a recent study of female and male Olympi c performa nces since 1983 by Valerie Thibault, et al., “Women and Men in Sport Performance: The Gender Gap Has Not Evolved Since 1983, ” Journal of Sports Science & Medicine, Vol. 9, No.2 (2010), fo und that although athletes from both sexes improved over th e time spa n, the “gender gap” between female and male performances remained stable, which suggests that “women’s performances at the high level will never match those of men ”, j. as Duke University School of Law professor a nd all- American track athlete Dor iane Coleman, te nnis champion Martina Navratilova, and Olympic track gold medalist Sanya Richards -Ross recently wrote, “[T]he evidence is unequivocal that starting in puberty, in every sport except sailing, shooting, and ri ding, there will al ways be signif icant numbers of boys and men who would beat the best girls and women in head - to-head competition. Claims to the contrary are simply a denial of science. ” (Doriane Coleman, Martina Navratilova, et al., “Pass the Equality A ct, But Don ’t Abandon Title IX, ” Washington Post (Apr. 29, 2019)) , k. the benefits that natural testosterone provides to male athletes are not diminished through the use of puberty blockers and cross -sex hormones. A recent Req. No. 1625 Page 30  study on the impact of treatment s regarding puberty blockers and cross-sex hormon es found that even “after 12 months of hormonal 17 therapy, ” a man who identifies as a woman and is taking cross -sex hormones “had an absolute advantage ” over female athletes and “will still likely have perf ormance benefits ” over women. (Wi lk, Anna, et al. , “Muscle Strength, Size and Composition Following 12 Months of Gender -Affirming Treatment in Transgender Individuals, ” The Journal of Clinical Endocrinology & Metabolism, Vol. 105, N o. 3 (2019)), and l. having separate sex -specific teams furthers efforts to promote sex equality and accomplishes this aim by providing opportunities for female athletes to demonstrate their skill, strength, and athletic abilities while also providing them with opportunities to obtain recognition and accolades, college scholars hips, and the numerous other long -term benefits that flow from success in athletic endeavors. SECTION 9. This act shall become effective July 1, 2023. SECTION 10. It being im mediately necessary for the pres ervation of the p ublic peace, health , or safety, an emergency is hereby Req. No. 1625 Page 31  declared to exist, by reason whereof thi s act shall take effect and be in full force from and after its passage and approval. 59-1-1625 EB 1/19/2023 10:58:46 AM I 118 THCONGRESS 1STSESSION H. R. 429 To amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to deny the trade or business expense deduction for the reimbursement of employee costs of child gender transition procedure or travel to obtain an abortion. IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES JANUARY 20, 2023 Mr. M AST (for himself, Mr. B ISHOP of North Carolina, Mr. D UNCAN , Mr. GOSAR , Mr. G AETZ , and Mr. N ORMAN ) introduced the following bill; which was referred to the Committee on Ways and Means A BILL To amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to deny the trade or business expense deduction for the reimburse-ment of employee costs of child gender transition proce-dure or travel to obtain an abortion. Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representa- 1 tives of the United States of America in Congress assembled, 2 SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE. 3 This Act may be cited as the ‘‘No Tax Breaks for 4 Radical Corporate Activism Act’’. 5 SEC. 2. DENIAL OF DEDUCTION. 6 (a) I NGENERAL .—Section 162 of the Internal Rev- 7 enue Code of 1986 is amended by redesignating subsection 8 VerDate Sep 11 2014 06:19 Feb 01, 2023 Jkt 039200 PO 00000 Frm 00001 Fmt 6652 Sfmt 6201 E:\BILLS\H429.IH H429pbinns on DSKJLVW7X2PROD with $$_JOB2 •HR 429 IH(s) as subsection (t), and by inserting after subsection (r) 1 the following new subsection: 2 ‘‘(s) D ISALLOWANCE OF CERTAIN EXPENSES RELAT - 3 ING TO ABORTION OR CHILD GENDER TRANSITION .— 4 ‘‘(1) I N GENERAL .—No deduction shall be al- 5 lowed under this chapter to an employer for any 6 amount paid or incurred to reimburse an employee 7 for, or to otherwise pay, expenses in connection 8 with— 9 ‘‘(A) travel for the purpose of obtaining an 10 abortion, or 11 ‘‘(B) any gender transition procedure for a 12 minor child of the employee. 13 ‘‘(2) D EFINITIONS .—For purposes of this sub- 14 section— 15 ‘‘(A) G ENDER TRANSITION PROCEDURE .— 16 ‘‘(i) I N GENERAL .—The term ‘gender 17 transition procedure’ means any medical or 18 surgical service which seeks to alter or re- 19 move physiological or anatomical charac- 20 teristics or features which are typical for 21 the individual’s biological sex, or to instill 22 or create physiological or anatomical char- 23 acteristics which resemble a sex different 24 VerDate Sep 11 2014 06:19 Feb 01, 2023 Jkt 039200 PO 00000 Frm 00002 Fmt 6652 Sfmt 6201 E:\BILLS\H429.IH H429pbinns on DSKJLVW7X2PROD with $$_JOB3 •HR 429 IHfrom the individual’s birth sex, for the pur- 1 pose of gender transition, including— 2 ‘‘(I) physician’s services and in- 3 patient and outpatient hospital serv- 4 ices, including gender transition sur- 5 gery, and 6 ‘‘(II) prescribed drugs related to 7 gender transition, including puberty- 8 blocking drugs, cross-sex hormones, or 9 other mechanisms to promote the de- 10 velopment of feminizing or 11 masculinizing features (in the opposite 12 sex). 13 ‘‘(ii) E XCEPTIONS .—Such term does 14 not include— 15 ‘‘(I) services for treatment of a 16 medically verifiable disorder of sex de- 17 velopment, including— 18 ‘‘(aa) external biological sex 19 characteristics which are 20 irresolvably ambiguous, such as 21 the presence of 46 XX chro- 22 mosomes with virilization, 46 XY 23 chromosomes with 24 VerDate Sep 11 2014 06:19 Feb 01, 2023 Jkt 039200 PO 00000 Frm 00003 Fmt 6652 Sfmt 6201 E:\BILLS\H429.IH H429pbinns on DSKJLVW7X2PROD with $$_JOB4 •HR 429 IHundervirilization, or both ovarian 1 and testicular tissue, or 2 ‘‘(bb) other physician-diag- 3 nosed disorder of sexual develop- 4 ment, with respect to which the 5 physician has determined 6 through genetic or biochemical 7 testing that the individual does 8 not have normal sex chromosome 9 structure, sex steroid hormone 10 production, or sex steroid hor- 11 mone action for a biological male 12 or biological female, or 13 ‘‘(II) treatment of any infection, 14 injury, disease, or disorder caused or 15 exacerbated by the performance of 16 any gender transition procedure, 17 whether or not the gender transition 18 procedure was performed in accord- 19 ance with State and Federal law or 20 whether not a deduction for expenses 21 in connection with the gender transi- 22 tion procedure is allowable under this 23 chapter. 24 VerDate Sep 11 2014 06:19 Feb 01, 2023 Jkt 039200 PO 00000 Frm 00004 Fmt 6652 Sfmt 6201 E:\BILLS\H429.IH H429pbinns on DSKJLVW7X2PROD with $$_JOB5 •HR 429 IH‘‘(iii) G ENDER .—The term ‘gender’ 1 means the psychological, behavioral, social, 2 and cultural aspects of being male or fe- 3 male. 4 ‘‘(iv) G ENDER TRANSITION .—The 5 term ‘gender transition’ means the process 6 in which an individual goes from identi- 7 fying with and living as a gender that cor- 8 responds to his or her biological sex to 9 identifying with and living as a gender dif- 10 ferent from his or her biological sex, and 11 may involve social, legal, or physical 12 changes. 13 ‘‘(v) G ENDER TRANSITION SUR - 14 GERY .— 15 ‘‘(I) I N GENERAL .—The term 16 ‘gender transition surgery’ means any 17 surgical service, including genital or 18 non-genital surgery, performed for the 19 purpose of assisting an individual with 20 a gender transition. 21 ‘‘(II) E XCEPTION .—Such term 22 does not include any service per- 23 formed because the individual suffers 24 from a physical disorder, physical in- 25 VerDate Sep 11 2014 06:19 Feb 01, 2023 Jkt 039200 PO 00000 Frm 00005 Fmt 6652 Sfmt 6201 E:\BILLS\H429.IH H429pbinns on DSKJLVW7X2PROD with $$_JOB6 •HR 429 IHjury, or physical illness which would, 1 as certified by a physician, place the 2 individual in imminent danger of 3 death or impairment of major bodily 4 function unless surgery is performed. 5 ‘‘(vi) G ENITAL SURGERY .—The term 6 ‘genital surgery’ includes surgical proce- 7 dures such as— 8 ‘‘(I) penectomy, orchiectomy, 9 vaginoplasty, clitoroplasty, or 10 vulvoplasty for biologically male pa- 11 tients, and 12 ‘‘(II) hysterectomy, ovariectomy, 13 reconstruction of the fixed part of the 14 urethra with or without a 15 metoidioplasty or a phalloplasty, vagi- 16 nectomy, scrotoplasty, or implantation 17 of erection or testicular prostheses for 18 biologically female patients. 19 ‘‘(vii) N ON-GENITAL SURGERY .—The 20 term ‘non-genital surgery’ includes surgical 21 procedures such as liposuction, lipofilling, 22 voice surgery, and— 23 ‘‘(I) augmentation mammoplasty, 24 facial feminization surgery, thyroid 25 VerDate Sep 11 2014 06:19 Feb 01, 2023 Jkt 039200 PO 00000 Frm 00006 Fmt 6652 Sfmt 6201 E:\BILLS\H429.IH H429pbinns on DSKJLVW7X2PROD with $$_JOB7 •HR 429 IHcartilage reduction, gluteal augmenta- 1 tion (whether implants or lipofilling), 2 hair reconstruction, or various aes- 3 thetic procedures for biologically male 4 patients, and 5 ‘‘(II) subcutaneous mastectomy, 6 pectoral implants, or various aesthetic 7 procedures for biologically female pa- 8 tients. 9 ‘‘(viii) P UBERTY -BLOCKING DRUGS .— 10 The term ‘puberty-blocking drugs’ means 11 gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) 12 analogues or other synthetic drugs used in 13 biological males to stop luteinizing hor- 14 mone secretion and therefore testosterone 15 secretion, and synthetic drugs used in bio- 16 logical females to stop the production of 17 estrogen and progesterone, when used to 18 delay or suppress pubertal development in 19 children for the purpose of assisting an in- 20 dividual with a gender transition. 21 ‘‘(ix) C ROSS -SEX HORMONES .—The 22 term ‘cross-sex hormones’ means testos- 23 terone or other androgens given to biologi- 24 cal females at doses which are profoundly 25 VerDate Sep 11 2014 06:19 Feb 01, 2023 Jkt 039200 PO 00000 Frm 00007 Fmt 6652 Sfmt 6201 E:\BILLS\H429.IH H429pbinns on DSKJLVW7X2PROD with $$_JOB8 •HR 429 IHlarger or more potent than would normally 1 occur naturally in healthy biological fe- 2 males, and estrogen given to biological 3 males at doses which are profoundly larger 4 or more potent than would normally occur 5 naturally in healthy biological males. 6 ‘‘(B) M INOR CHILD .—The term ‘minor 7 child’ means an individual who has not attained 8 age 18.’’. 9 (b) E FFECTIVE DATE.—The amendments made by 10 this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after 11 the date of the enactment of this Act. 12 Æ VerDate Sep 11 2014 06:19 Feb 01, 2023 Jkt 039200 PO 00000 Frm 00008 Fmt 6652 Sfmt 6301 E:\BILLS\H429.IH H429pbinns on DSKJLVW7X2PROD with $$_JOBFIRST REGULAR SESSION HOUSE BILL NO. 916 102ND GENERAL ASSEMBLY INTRODUCED BY REPRESENTATIVE BUCHHEIT-COURTWAY. DANA RADEMAN MILLER, Chief Clerk AN ACT 2 3 2 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 To amend chapter 191, RSMo, by adding thereto seven new sections relating to gender transition procedures, with a delayed effective date. Be it enacted by the General Assembly of the state of Missouri, as follows: Section A. Chapter 191, RSMo, is amended by adding thereto seven new sections, to be known as sections 191.1720, 191.1725, 191.1730, 191.1735, 191.1740, 191.1742, and 191.1745, to read as follows: 191.1720. Sections 191.1720 to 191.1745 shall be known and may be cited as the "Missouri Child and Adolescent Protection (MCAP) Act". 191.1725. For purposes of this section, the following terms mean: (1) "Biological sex", the biological indication of male or female in the context of reproductive potential or capacity, such as sex chromosomes, naturally occurring sex hormones, gonads, and nonambiguous internal and external genitalia present at birth, without regard to an individual's psychological, chosen, or subjective experience of gender; (2) "Cross-sex hormones": (a) Testosterone or other androgens given to biological sex females in amounts that are larger or more potent than would normally occur naturally in healthy biological sex females; and (b) Estrogen given to biological sex males in amounts that are larger or more potent than would normally occur naturally in healthy biological sex males; (3) "Gender", the psychological, behavioral, social, and cultural aspects of being male or female; EXPLANATION — Matter enclosed in bold-faced brackets [thus] in the above bill is not enacted and is intended to be omitted from the law. Matter in bold-face type in the above bill is proposed language. HB 916 2 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 51 (4) "Gender reassignment surgery", any medical or surgical service that seeks to surgically alter or remove physical or anatomical characteristics or features that are typical for the individual's biological sex in order to instill or create physiological or anatomical characteristics that resemble a sex different from the individual's biological sex including, but not limited to, genital or nongenital gender reassignment surgery performed for the purpose of assisting an individual with a gender transition; (5) "Gender transition", the process in which an individual transitions from identifying with and living as a gender that corresponds to his or her biological sex to identifying with and living as a gender different from his or her biological sex and may involve social, legal, or physical changes; (6) "Gender transition procedure": (a) Any medical or surgical service, including, but not limited to, physician's services, inpatient and outpatient hospital services, or prescribed drugs, related to gender transition that seeks to: a. Alter or remove physical or anatomical characteristics or features that are typical for the individual's biological sex; or b. Instill or create physiological or anatomical characteristics that resemble a sex different from the individual's biological sex including, but not limited to: (i) Medical services that provide puberty-blocking drugs, cross-sex hormones, or other mechanisms to promote the development of features commonly associated with members of the opposite sex; or (ii) Genital or nongenital gender reassignment surgery performed for the purpose of assisting an individual with a gender transition; (b) The term "gender transition procedure" shall not include: a. Services to individuals born with a medically verifiable disorder of sex development including, but not limited to, an individual with external biological sex characteristics that are irresolvably ambiguous, such as those born with 46,XX chromosomes with virilization, 46,XY chromosomes with undervirilization, or having both ovarian and testicular tissue; b. Services provided when a physician has otherwise diagnosed an individual with a disorder of sexual development and determined through genetic or biochemical testing that the individual does not have normal sex chromosome structure, sex steroid hormone production, or sex steroid hormone action; c. The treatment of any infection, injury, disease, or disorder that has been caused by or exacerbated by the performance of gender transition procedures regardless of whether the gender transition procedure was performed in accordance with state and federal law; or HB 916 3 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 80 81 82 83 84 85 86 87 88 d. Any procedure undertaken because the individual suffers from a physical disorder, physical injury, or physical illness that would, as certified by a physician, place the individual in imminent danger of death or impairment of a major bodily function unless surgery is performed; (7) "Genital gender reassignment surgery", a medical procedure performed for the purpose of assisting an individual with a gender transition including, but not limited to: (a) Surgical procedures such as penectomy, orchiectomy, vaginoplasty, clitoroplasty, or vulvoplasty for biologically male patients or hysterectomy or ovariectomy for biologically female patients; (b) Reconstruction of the fixed part of the urethra with or without a metoidioplasty; or (c) Phalloplasty, vaginectomy, scrotoplasty, or implantation of erection or testicular prostheses for biologically female patients; (8) "Health care provider", an individual who is licensed, certified, or otherwise authorized by the laws of this state to administer health care in the ordinary course of the practice of his or her profession, including mental health care providers; (9) "Nongenital gender reassignment surgery", a medical procedure performed for the purpose of assisting an individual with a gender transition including, but not limited to: (a) Surgical procedures for biologically male patients, such as augmentation mammoplasty, facial feminization surgery, liposuction, lipofilling, voice surgery, thyroid cartilage reduction, gluteal augmentation, hair reconstruction, or various aesthetic procedures; or (b) Surgical procedures for biologically female patients, such as subcutaneous mastectomy, voice surgery, liposuction, lipofilling, pectoral implants, or various aesthetic procedures; (10) "Physician", an individual who is licensed as a physician under chapter 334; (11) "Puberty-blocking drugs", gonadotropin-releasing hormone analogues or other synthetic drugs used in biological sex males to stop luteinizing hormone secretion and therefore testosterone secretion, or synthetic drugs used in biological sex females that stop the production of estrogens and progesterone, when used to delay or suppress pubertal development in children for the purpose of assisting an individual with a gender transition; (12) "Public funds", state, county, or local government moneys, including any such moneys deposited with or derived from any department, agency, or instrumentality authorized or appropriated under state law. HB 916 4 191.1730. A physician or other health care provider shall not knowingly provide 2 gender transition procedures to any individual under eighteen years of age and shall not 3 refer any individual under eighteen years of age to any health care provider for gender 4 transition procedures. 191.1735. 1. Public funds shall not be directly or indirectly used, granted, paid, 2 or distributed to any individual, entity, or organization that provides gender transition 3 procedures to an individual under eighteen years of age. 4 2. The MO HealthNet program shall not reimburse or provide coverage for 5 gender transition procedures to an individual under eighteen years of age. 6 3. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any speech protected by the 7 First Amendment of the United States Constitution. 191.1740. Any referral for or provision of gender transition procedures to an 2 individual under eighteen years of age shall be considered unprofessional conduct and 3 any health care provider doing so may be subject to discipline by the appropriate 4 licensing entity or disciplinary review board with competent jurisdiction in this state. 191.1742. Sections 191.1720 to 191.1745 shall not apply to the provision of cross- 2 sex hormones to any individual under eighteen years of age who was prescribed cross- 3 sex hormones before January 1, 2024, to treat an inconsistency between the individual's 4 biological sex and the individual's perceived gender or perceived sex. 191.1745. 1. The provision of a gender transition procedure to an individual 2 under eighteen years of age in violation of sections 191.1720 to 191.1745 shall be 3 considered grounds for a cause of action against the physician or health care provider. 4 2. The provisions of chapter 538 shall not apply to any action brought under this 5 section. 6 3. (1) An individual under eighteen years of age may bring an action under this 7 section throughout the individual's minority through a parent or next friend and may 8 bring an action under this section in the individual's own name upon reaching the age of 9 majority at any time from that point until twenty years after reaching the age of 10 majority or four years from the time of discovery by the injured party of both the injury 11 and the causal relationship between the treatment and the injury, whichever date is 12 later. 13 (2) If at the time the individual abused attains eighteen years of age he or she is 14 under other legal disability, the limitation period under subdivision (1) of this subsection 15 shall not begin to run until the removal of the disability. 16 (3) The limitation period in subdivision (1) of this subsection shall not run 17 during a time period when the individual is subject to threats, intimidation, 18 manipulation, fraudulent concealment, or fraud perpetrated by the physician or other HB 916 5 19 health care professional who prescribed or otherwise provided gender transition 20 procedures or by any person acting in the interest of the physician or other health care 21 professional. 22 4. (1) An individual may assert an actual or threatened violation of sections 23 191.1720 to 191.1745 as a claim or defense in a judicial proceeding. 24 (2) The following damages may be awarded to a claimant described in 25 subdivision (1) of this subsection: 26 (a) Compensatory damages including, but not limited to: 27 a. Pain and suffering; 28 b. Loss of reputation; 29 c. Loss of income; and 30 d. Loss of consortium including, but not limited to, the loss of expectation of 31 sharing parenthood; 32 (b) Injunctive relief; 33 (c) Declaratory judgment; 34 (d) Punitive damages; and 35 (e) Any other appropriate relief. 36 (3) A prevailing party who establishes a violation of sections 191.1720 to 37 191.1745 shall recover reasonable attorney's fees. 38 5. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, an action under this section may 39 be commenced, and relief may be granted, in a judicial proceeding without regard to 40 whether the individual commencing the action has sought or exhausted available 41 administrative remedies. 42 6. The attorney general may bring an action to enforce compliance with sections 43 191.1720 to 191.1745. 44 7. Sections 191.1720 to 191.1745 do not deny, impair, or otherwise affect any 45 right or authority of the attorney general, the state, or any agency, officer, or employee 46 of the state, acting under any law other than sections 191.1720 to 191.1745, to institute 47 or intervene in any proceeding. Section B. The enactment of sections 191.1720 to 191.1745 of this act shall become 2 effective on January 1, 2024. ✔23.3027.02000 Sixty-eighth Legislative Assembly of North Dakota Introduced by Representatives S. Olson, K. Anderson, Henderson, Meier, Novak, Rohr, Steiner, VanWinkle A concurrent resolution urging public schools and public entities, including agencies or departments that collect vital statistics, to protect women's rights by distinguishing between the sexes according to biological sex at birth for the purpose of providing equal opportunities and ensuring the privacy and safety of women and girls. WHEREAS, a male and a female possess unique and immutable biological differences that manifest prior to birth and increase as the individual ages and experiences puberty; and WHEREAS, biological differences between the sexes mean that only a female is able to become pregnant, give birth, and breastfeed children; and WHEREAS, biological differences between the sexes mean that a male is, on average, bigger, stronger, and faster than a female; and WHEREAS, biological differences between the sexes leave a female more physically vulnerable than a male to specific forms of violence, including sexual violence; and WHEREAS, females have suffered historically from discrimination in education, athletics, and employment; and WHEREAS, when it comes to sex, "equal" does not mean "same" or "identical" and separate is not inherently unequal; and WHEREAS, biological differences between the sexes are enduring and may warrant the creation of separate social, educational, athletic, or other spaces to ensure safety or allow members of each sex to succeed and thrive; and WHEREAS, inconsistencies in court rulings and policy initiatives with respect to the definitions of "sex", "male", "female", "man", and "woman" have led to endangerment of single-sex spaces and resources, thereby necessitating clarification of certain terms; and WHEREAS, there are legitimate reasons to distinguish between the sexes with respect to athletics, prisons and other detention facilities, domestic violence shelters, rape and abuse Page No. 1 23.3027.02000 HOUSE CONCURRENT RESOLUTION NO. 3010 Sixty-eighth Legislative Assembly crisis centers, locker rooms, restrooms, and other areas where safety and privacy are implicated; and WHEREAS, policies and laws that distinguish between the sexes are subject to intermediate constitutional scrutiny, which forbids unfair discrimination against similarly situated males and females but allows the law to distinguish between the sexes if distinctions are substantially related to important governmental objectives; NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED BY THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF NORTH DAKOTA, THE SENATE CONCURRING THEREIN: That the Sixty-eighth Legislative Assembly urges public schools and public entities, including agencies or departments that collect vital statistics, to protect women's rights by distinguishing between the sexes according to biological sex at birth for the purpose of providing equal opportunities and ensuring the privacy and safety of women and girls; and BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED , that the Secretary of State forward a copy of this resolution to the Superintendent of Public Instruction, the superintendent of each school district in the state, and the Executive Director of the Department of Health and Human Services. Page No. 2 23.3027.020001 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 REFERENCE TITLE: gender transition; prohibitions; hormone therapies State of Arizona Senate Fifty-sixth Legislature First Regular Session 2023 SB 1702 Introduced by Senator Wadsack: Representatives Jones, McGarr AN ACT AMENDING SECTION 32-3230, ARIZONA REVISED STATUTES; RELATING TO HEALTH PROFESSIONALS. (TEXT OF BILL BEGINS ON NEXT PAGE) Be it enacted by the Legislature of the State of Arizona: Section 1. Section 32-3230, Arizona Revised Statutes, is amended to read: 32-3230. Prohibition of permanent gender reassignment surgery for minors; prohibition on referring for or providing hormone therapy for minors; definitions A. A physician may not provide irreversible PERMANENT gender reassignment surgery to any individual who is under eighteen years of age. A HEALTH PROFESSIONAL MAY NOT MAKE A REFERRAL FOR OR PROVIDE CROSS-SEX HORMONES OR PUBERTY-BLOCKING DRUGS TO ANY INDIVIDUAL WHO IS UNDER EIGHTEEN YEARS OF AGE. B. A physician may provide any of the following to an individual who is under eighteen years of age: 1. Services to an individual born with a medically verifiable disorder of sex development, including an individual with external biological sex characteristics that are irresolvably ambiguous, such as being born with forty-six XX chromosomes with virilization or forty-six XY chromosomes with undervirilization or having both ovarian and testicular tissue. 2. Services provided when a physician has otherwise diagnosed a disorder of sexual development and has determined through genetic or biochemical testing that the individual does not have normal sex chromosome structure, sex steroid hormone production or sex steroid hormone action. 3. The treatment of any infection, injury, disease or disorder that has been caused by or exacerbated by the performance of gender transition procedures, whether or not the gender transition procedure was performed in accordance with state and federal law. 4. Any procedure undertaken because the individual suffers from a physical disorder, physical injury or physical illness that would, as certified by a physician, place the individual in imminent danger of death or impairment of major bodily function unless surgery is performed. C. For the purposes of this section: 1. "Biological sex" means the biological indication of male and female in the context of reproductive potential or capacity, such as sex chromosomes, naturally occurring sex hormones, gonads and nonambiguous internal and external genitalia present at birth, without regard to an individual's psychological, chosen or subjective experience of gender. 2. "CROSS-SEX HORMONES" MEANS EITHER OF THE FOLLOWING: (a) TESTOSTERONE OR OTHER ANDROGENS GIVEN TO BIOLOGICAL FEMALES IN AMOUNTS THAT ARE LARGER OR MORE POTENT THAN WOULD NORMALLY OCCUR NATURALLY IN HEALTHY BIOLOGICAL SEX FEMALES. (b) ESTROGEN GIVEN TO BIOLOGICAL MALES IN AMOUNTS THAT ARE LARGER OR MORE POTENT THAN WOULD NORMALLY OCCUR NATURALLY IN HEALTHY BIOLOGICAL SEX MALES. 2. 3. "Gender" means the psychological, behavioral, social and cultural aspects of being male or female. 3. 4. "Gender transition" means the process in which a person goes from identifying with and living as a gender that corresponds to the person's biological sex to identifying with and living as a gender different from the person's biological sex and may involve social, legal or physical changes. 4. 5. "Irreversible PERMANENT gender reassignment surgery" means a medical procedure performed for the purpose of assisting an individual with a gender transition, including any of the following: (a) Penectomy, orchiectomy, vaginoplasty, clitoroplasty or vulvoplasty for biologically male patients or hysterectomy or ovariectomy for biologically female patients. (b) Metoidioplasty, phalloplasty, vaginectomy, scrotoplasty or implantation of erection or testicular prostheses for biologically female patients. (c) Augmentation mammoplasty for biologically male patients and subcutaneous mastectomy for female patients. 5. 6. "Physician" means a person who is licensed pursuant to chapter 13 or 17 of this title. 7. "PUBERTY-BLOCKING DRUGS" MEANS EITHER OF THE FOLLOWING WHEN USED TO DELAY OR SUPPRESS PUBERTAL DEVELOPMENT IN CHILDREN FOR THE PURPOSE OF ASSISTING AN INDIVIDUAL WITH A GENDER TRANSITION: (a) GONADOTROPIN-RELEASING HORMONE ANALOGUES OR OTHER SYNTHETIC DRUGS USED IN BIOLOGICAL SEX MALES TO STOP LUTEINIZING HORMONE SECRETION AND TESTOSTERONE SECRETION. (b) SYNTHETIC DRUGS USED IN BIOLOGICAL SEX FEMALES TO STOP THE PRODUCTION OF ESTROGENS AND PROGESTERONE. Sec. 2. Effective date; purpose A. This act is effective from and after March 31, 2024. B. The effective date of this act is delayed so that minors in this state who are currently using puberty-blocking drugs or cross-sex hormones have time for appropriate medication tapering and discontinuation under the care of the minor's physician or other health professional.II 118 THCONGRESS 1STSESSION S. 187 To amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to deny the trade or business expense deduction for the reimbursement of employee costs of child gender transition procedure or travel to obtain an abortion. IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES JANUARY 31, 2023 Mr. R UBIO (for himself and Mr. D AINES ) introduced the following bill; which was read twice and referred to the Committee on Finance A BILL To amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to deny the trade or business expense deduction for the reimburse-ment of employee costs of child gender transition proce-dure or travel to obtain an abortion. Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representa- 1 tives of the United States of America in Congress assembled, 2 SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE. 3 This Act may be cited as the ‘‘No Tax Breaks for 4 Radical Corporate Activism Act of 2023’’. 5 SEC. 2. DENIAL OF DEDUCTION. 6 (a) I NGENERAL .—Section 162 of the Internal Rev- 7 enue Code of 1986 is amended by redesignating subsection 8 VerDate Sep 11 2014 00:59 Feb 10, 2023 Jkt 039200 PO 00000 Frm 00001 Fmt 6652 Sfmt 6201 E:\BILLS\S187.IS S187pbinns on DSKJLVW7X2PROD with $$_JOB2 •S 187 IS(s) as subsection (t), and by inserting after subsection (r) 1 the following new subsection: 2 ‘‘(s) D ISALLOWANCE OF CERTAIN EXPENSES RELAT - 3 ING TO ABORTION OR CHILD GENDER TRANSITION .— 4 ‘‘(1) I N GENERAL .—No deduction shall be al- 5 lowed under this chapter to an employer for any 6 amount paid or incurred to reimburse an employee 7 for, or to otherwise pay, expenses in connection 8 with— 9 ‘‘(A) travel for the purpose of obtaining an 10 abortion, or 11 ‘‘(B) any gender transition procedure for a 12 minor child of the employee. 13 ‘‘(2) D EFINITIONS .—For purposes of this sub- 14 section— 15 ‘‘(A) G ENDER TRANSITION PROCEDURE .— 16 ‘‘(i) I N GENERAL .—The term ‘gender 17 transition procedure’ means any medical or 18 surgical service which seeks to alter or re- 19 move physiological or anatomical charac- 20 teristics or features which are typical for 21 the individual’s biological sex, or to instill 22 or create physiological or anatomical char- 23 acteristics which resemble a sex different 24 VerDate Sep 11 2014 00:59 Feb 10, 2023 Jkt 039200 PO 00000 Frm 00002 Fmt 6652 Sfmt 6201 E:\BILLS\S187.IS S187pbinns on DSKJLVW7X2PROD with $$_JOB3 •S 187 ISfrom the individual’s birth sex, for the pur- 1 pose of gender transition, including— 2 ‘‘(I) physician’s services and in- 3 patient and outpatient hospital serv- 4 ices, including gender transition sur- 5 gery, and 6 ‘‘(II) prescribed drugs related to 7 gender transition, including puberty- 8 blocking drugs, cross-sex hormones, or 9 other mechanisms to promote the de- 10 velopment of feminizing or 11 masculinizing features (in the opposite 12 sex). 13 ‘‘(ii) E XCEPTIONS .—Such term does 14 not include— 15 ‘‘(I) services for treatment of a 16 medically verifiable disorder of sex de- 17 velopment, including— 18 ‘‘(aa) external biological sex 19 characteristics which are 20 irresolvably ambiguous, such as 21 presence of 46 XX chromosomes 22 with virilization, 46 XY chro- 23 mosomes with undervirilization, 24 VerDate Sep 11 2014 00:59 Feb 10, 2023 Jkt 039200 PO 00000 Frm 00003 Fmt 6652 Sfmt 6201 E:\BILLS\S187.IS S187pbinns on DSKJLVW7X2PROD with $$_JOB4 •S 187 ISor both ovarian and testicular tis- 1 sue, or 2 ‘‘(bb) other physician-diag- 3 nosed disorder of sexual develop- 4 ment, with respect to which the 5 physician has determined 6 through genetic or biochemical 7 testing that the individual does 8 not have normal sex chromosome 9 structure, sex steroid hormone 10 production, or sex steroid hor- 11 mone action for a biological male 12 or biological female, or 13 ‘‘(II) treatment of any infection, 14 injury, disease, or disorder caused or 15 exacerbated by the performance of 16 any gender transition procedure, 17 whether or not the gender transition 18 procedure was performed in accord- 19 ance with State and Federal law or 20 whether not a deduction for expenses 21 in connection with the gender transi- 22 tion procedure is allowable under this 23 chapter. 24 VerDate Sep 11 2014 00:59 Feb 10, 2023 Jkt 039200 PO 00000 Frm 00004 Fmt 6652 Sfmt 6201 E:\BILLS\S187.IS S187pbinns on DSKJLVW7X2PROD with $$_JOB5 •S 187 IS‘‘(iii) G ENDER .—The term ‘gender’ 1 means the psychological, behavioral, social, 2 and cultural aspects of being male or fe- 3 male. 4 ‘‘(iv) G ENDER TRANSITION .—The 5 term ‘gender transition’ means the process 6 in which an individual goes from identi- 7 fying with and living as a gender that cor- 8 responds to his or her biological sex to 9 identifying with and living as a gender dif- 10 ferent from his or her biological sex, and 11 may involve social, legal, or physical 12 changes. 13 ‘‘(v) G ENDER TRANSITION SUR - 14 GERY .— 15 ‘‘(I) I N GENERAL .—The term 16 ‘gender transition surgery’ means any 17 surgical service, including genital or 18 non-genital surgery, performed for the 19 purpose of assisting an individual with 20 a gender transition. 21 ‘‘(II) E XCEPTION .—Such term 22 does not include any service per- 23 formed because the individual suffers 24 from a physical disorder, physical in- 25 VerDate Sep 11 2014 00:59 Feb 10, 2023 Jkt 039200 PO 00000 Frm 00005 Fmt 6652 Sfmt 6201 E:\BILLS\S187.IS S187pbinns on DSKJLVW7X2PROD with $$_JOB6 •S 187 ISjury, or physical illness which would, 1 as certified by a physician, place the 2 individual in imminent danger of 3 death or impairment of major bodily 4 function unless surgery is performed. 5 ‘‘(vi) G ENITAL SURGERY .—The term 6 ‘genital surgery’ includes surgical proce- 7 dures such as— 8 ‘‘(I) penectomy, orchiectomy, 9 vaginoplasty, clitoroplasty, or 10 vulvoplasty for biologically male pa- 11 tients, and 12 ‘‘(II) hysterectomy, ovariectomy, 13 reconstruction of the fixed part of the 14 urethra with or without a 15 metoidioplasty or a phalloplasty, vagi- 16 nectomy, scrotoplasty, or implantation 17 of erection or testicular prostheses for 18 biologically female patients. 19 ‘‘(vii) N ON-GENITAL SURGERY .—The 20 term ‘non-genital surgery’ includes surgical 21 procedures such as liposuction, lipofilling, 22 voice surgery, and— 23 ‘‘(I) augmentation mammoplasty, 24 facial feminization surgery, thyroid 25 VerDate Sep 11 2014 00:59 Feb 10, 2023 Jkt 039200 PO 00000 Frm 00006 Fmt 6652 Sfmt 6201 E:\BILLS\S187.IS S187pbinns on DSKJLVW7X2PROD with $$_JOB7 •S 187 IScartilage reduction, gluteal augmentation (whether implants or lipofilling), hair reconstruction, or various aesthetic procedures for biologically male patients, and ‘‘(II) subcutaneous mastectomy, pectoral implants, or various aesthetic procedures for biologically female patients. ‘‘(viii) PUBERTY-BLOCKING DRUGS . The term ‘puberty-blocking drugs’ means Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) analogues or other synthetic drugs used in biological males to stop luteinizing hormone secretion and therefore testosterone secretion, and synthetic drugs used in biological females to stop the production of estrogen and progesterone, when used to delay or suppress pubertal development in children for the purpose of assisting an individual with a gender transition. ‘‘(ix) CROSS -SEX HORMONES .—The term ‘cross-sex hormones’ means testosterone or other androgens given to biological females at doses which are profoundly larger or more potent than would normally 1 occur naturally in healthy biological females, and estrogen given to biological males at doses which are profoundly larger or more potent than would normally occur naturally in healthy biological males. ‘‘(B) M INOR CHILD .—The term ‘minor child’ means an individual who has not attained age 18.’’. (b) E FFECTIVE DATE.—The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act. Æ VerDate Sep 11 2014 00:59 Feb 10, 2023 Jkt 039200 PO 00000 Frm 00008 Fmt 6652 Sfmt 6301 E:\BILLS\S187.IS S187pbinns on DSKJLVW7X2PROD with $$_JOB FIRST REGULAR SESSION SENATE BILL NO. 598 102ND GENERAL ASSEMBLY INTRODUCED BY SENATOR BRATTIN. 2176S.01I KRISTINA MARTIN, Secretary AN ACT To amend chapter 191, RSMo, by adding thereto seven new sections relating to gender transition procedures, with a delayed effective date. Be it enacted by the General Assembly of the State of Missouri, as follows: Section A. Chapter 191, RSMo, is amended by adding thereto 1 seven new sections, to be known as sections 191.1720, 191.1725, 2 191.1730, 191.1735, 191.1740, 191.1742, and 191.1745, to read 3 as follows: 4 191.1720. Sections 191.1720 to 191.1745 shall be known 1 and may be cited as the "Missouri Child and Adolescent 2 Protection (MCAP) Act". 3 191.1725. For purposes of sections 191.1720 to 1 191.1745, the following terms mean: 2 (1) "Biological sex", the biological indication of 3 male or female in the context of reproductive potential or 4 capacity, such as sex chromosomes, naturally occurring sex 5 hormones, gonads, and nonambiguous internal and external 6 genitalia present at birth, without regard to an 7 individual's psychological, chosen, or subjective experience 8 of gender; 9 (2) "Cross-sex hormones": 10 (a) Testosterone or other androgens given to 11 biological sex females in amounts that are larger or more 12 potent than would normally occur naturally in healthy 13 biological sex females; and 14 SB 598 2 (b) Estrogen given to biological sex males in amounts 15 that are larger or more potent than would normally occur 16 naturally in healthy biological sex males; 17 (3) "Gender", the psychological, behavioral, social, 18 and cultural aspects of being male or female; 19 (4) "Gender transition", the process in which an 20 individual transitions from identifying with and living as a 21 gender that corresponds to his or her biological sex to 22 identifying with and living as a gender different from his 23 or her biological sex and m ay involve social, legal, or 24 physical changes; 25 (5) "Gender transition procedure": 26 (a) Any medical or surgical service, including, but 27 not limited to, physician's services, inpatient and 28 outpatient hospital services, or prescribed drugs, rela ted 29 to gender transition that seeks to: 30 a. Alter or remove physical or anatomical 31 characteristics or features that are typical for the 32 individual's biological sex; or 33 b. Instill or create physiological or anatomical 34 characteristics that res emble a sex different from the 35 individual's biological sex, including, but not limited to: 36 (i) Medical services that provide puberty -blocking 37 drugs, cross -sex hormones, or other mechanisms to promote 38 the development of features commonly associated with members 39 of the opposite sex; or 40 (ii) Genital or nongenital gender reassignment surgery 41 performed for the purpose of assisting an individual with a 42 gender transition; 43 (b) The term "gender transition procedure" shall not 44 include: 45 SB 598 3 a. Services to individuals born with a medically 46 verifiable disorder of sex development, including, but not 47 limited to, an individual with external biological sex 48 characteristics that are irresolvably ambiguous, such as 49 those born with 46,XX chromosome s with virilization, 46,XY 50 chromosomes with undervirilization, or having both ovarian 51 and testicular tissue; 52 b. Services provided when a physician has otherwise 53 diagnosed an individual with a disorder of sex development 54 and determined through gen etic or biochemical testing that 55 the individual does not have normal sex chromosome 56 structure, sex steroid hormone production, or sex steroid 57 hormone action; 58 c. The treatment of any infection, injury, disease, or 59 disorder that has been caused by or exacerbated by the 60 performance of gender transition procedures regardless of 61 whether the gender transition procedure was performed in 62 accordance with state and federal law; or 63 d. Any procedure undertaken because the individual 64 suffers from a p hysical disorder, physical injury, or 65 physical illness that would, as certified by a physician, 66 place the individual in imminent danger of death or 67 impairment of a major bodily function unless surgery is 68 performed; 69 (6) "Genital gender reassignmen t surgery", a medical 70 procedure performed for the purpose of assisting an 71 individual with a gender transition, including, but not 72 limited to: 73 (a) Surgical procedures such as penectomy, 74 orchiectomy, vaginoplasty, clitoroplasty, or vulvoplasty for 75 biologically male patients or hysterectomy or ovariectomy 76 for biologically female patients; 77 SB 598 4 (b) Reconstruction of the fixed part of the urethra 78 with or without a metoidioplasty; or 79 (c) Phalloplasty, vaginectomy, scrotoplasty, or 80 implantatio n of erection or testicular prostheses for 81 biologically female patients; 82 (7) "Health care provider", an individual who is 83 licensed, certified, or otherwise authorized by the laws of 84 this state to administer health care in the ordinary course 85 of the practice of his or her profession, including mental 86 health care providers; 87 (8) "Nongenital gender reassignment surgery", a 88 medical procedure performed for the purpose of assisting an 89 individual with a gender transition, including, but not 90 limited to: 91 (a) Surgical procedures for biologically male 92 patients, such as augmentation mammoplasty, facial 93 feminization surgery, liposuction, lipofilling, voice 94 surgery, thyroid cartilage reduction, gluteal augmentation, 95 hair reconstruction, or var ious aesthetic procedures; or 96 (b) Surgical procedures for biologically female 97 patients, such as subcutaneous mastectomy, voice surgery, 98 liposuction, lipofilling, pectoral implants, or various 99 aesthetic procedures; 100 (9) "Physician", an individ ual who is licensed as a 101 physician under chapter 334; 102 (10) "Puberty -blocking drugs", gonadotropin -releasing 103 hormone analogues or other synthetic drugs used in 104 biological sex males to stop luteinizing hormone secretion 105 and therefore testosterone s ecretion, or synthetic drugs 106 used in biological sex females that stop the production of 107 estrogens and progesterone, when used to delay or suppress 108 SB 598 5 pubertal development in children for the purpose of 109 assisting an individual with a gender transition; 110 (11) "Public funds", any funds received or controlled 111 by this state or any agency or political subdivision 112 thereof, including, but not limited to, funds derived from 113 federal, state or local taxes, gifts or grants from any 114 source, public or private, federal grants or payments, or 115 intergovernmental transfers. 116 191.1730. A physician or other health care provider 1 shall not knowingly provide gender transition procedures to 2 any individual under eighteen years of age and shall not 3 refer any individual under eighteen years of age to any 4 health care provider for gender transition procedures. 5 191.1735. 1. Public funds shall not be directly or 1 indirectly used, granted, paid, or distributed to any 2 individual, entity, or organization that provides gender 3 transition procedures to an individual under eighteen years 4 of age. 5 2. The MO HealthNet program shall not reimburse or 6 provide coverage for gender transition procedures to an 7 individual under eighteen years o f age. 8 3. The provisions of this section shall not apply to 9 any speech protected by the First Amendment of the United 10 States Constitution. 11 191.1740. Any referral for or provision of gender 1 transition procedures to an individual under eighteen years 2 of age shall be considered unprofessional conduct and any 3 health care provider doing so may be subject to discipline 4 by the appropriate licensing entity or disciplinary review 5 board with competent jurisdiction in this state. 6 191.1742. Sections 191.1720 to 191.1745 shall not 1 apply to the provision of cross -sex hormones to any 2 SB 598 6 individual under eighteen years of age who was prescribed 3 cross-sex hormones before January 1, 2024, to treat an 4 inconsistency be tween the individual's biological sex and 5 the individual's perceived gender or perceived sex. 6 191.1745. 1. The provision of a gender transition 1 procedure to an individual under eighteen years of age in 2 violation of sections 191.1720 to 191.1745 shall be 3 considered grounds for a cause of action against the 4 physician or health care provider. 5 2. The provisions of chapter 538 shall not apply to 6 any action brought under this section. 7 3. (1) An individual under eighteen yea rs of age may 8 bring an action under this section throughout the 9 individual's minority through a parent or next friend and 10 may bring an action under this section in the individual's 11 own name upon reaching the age of majority at any time from 12 that point until twenty years after reaching the age of 13 majority or four years from the time of discovery by the 14 injured party of both the injury and the causal relationship 15 between the treatment and the injury, whichever date is 16 later. 17 (2) If, at the time the individual described in 18 subsection 1 of this section attains eighteen years of age, 19 he or she is under a legal disability, the limitation period 20 under subdivision (1) of this subsection shall not begin to 21 run until the removal of the disability. 22 (3) The limitation period in subdivision (1) of this 23 subsection shall not run during a time period when the 24 individual is subject to threats, intimidation, 25 manipulation, fraudulent concealment, or fraud perpetrated 26 by the physician or other health care professional who 27 prescribed or otherwise provided gender transition 28 SB 598 7 procedures or by any person acting in the interest of the 29 physician or other health care professional. 30 4. (1) An individual may assert an actual or 31 threatened violation of sections 191.1720 to 191.1745 as a 32 claim or defense in a judicial proceeding. 33 (2) The following damages may be awarded to a claimant 34 described in subdivision (1) of this subsection: 35 (a) Compensatory damages including, but not limited to: 36 a. Pain and suffering; 37 b. Loss of reputation; 38 c. Loss of income; and 39 d. Loss of consortium including, but not limited to, 40 the loss of expectation of sharing parenthood; 41 (b) Injunctive relief; 42 (c) Declaratory judgment; 43 (d) Punitive damages; and 44 (e) Any other appropriate relief. 45 (3) A prevailing party who establishes a violation of 46 sections 191.1720 to 191.1745 shall recover reasonable 47 attorney's fees. 48 5. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the 49 contrary, an action under this section may be commenced, and 50 relief may be granted, in a judicial proceeding without 51 regard to whether the individual commencing the action has 52 sought or exhausted available administrative remedies. 53 6. The attorney general may bring an action to enforce 54 compliance with sections 191.1720 to 191.1745. 55 7. Sections 191.1720 to 191.1745 do not deny, impair, 56 or otherwise affect any right or authority of the attorney 57 general, the state, or any agency, officer , or employee of 58 the state, acting under any law other than sections 191.1720 59 to 191.1745, to institute or intervene in any proceeding. 60 SB 598 8 Section B. The enactment of sections 191.1720 to 1 191.1745 of this act shall become effective on J anuary 1, 2 2024. 3  Session of 2023 SENATE BILL No. 180 By Committee on Public Health and Welfare 2-7 AN ACT establishing the women's bill of rights; providing a meaning of biological sex for purposes of statutory construction. WHEREAS, Male and female individuals possess unique and immutable biological differences that manifest prior to birth and increase as such individuals age and experience puberty; and WHEREAS, Biological differences between the sexes mean that only female individuals are able to become pregnant, give birth and breastfeed children; and WHEREAS, Biological differences between the sexes mean that male individuals are, on average, bigger, stronger and faster than female individuals; and WHEREAS, Biological differences between the sexes leave female individuals more physically vulnerable than male individuals to specific forms of violence, including sexual violence; and WHEREAS, Female individuals have historically suffered from discrimination in education, athletics and employment; and WHEREAS, Biological differences between the sexes are enduring and may, in some circumstances, warrant the creation of separate social, educational, athletics or other spaces in order to ensure safety and to allow members of each sex to succeed and thrive; and WHEREAS, Inconsistencies in court rulings and policy initiatives with respect to the definitions of "sex," "male," "female," "man" and "woman" have led to the endangerment of single-sex spaces and resources thereby necessitating the clarification of certain terms. Now, therefore: Be it enacted by the Legislature of the State of Kansas: Section 1. (a) Notwithstanding any provision of state law to the contrary, with respect to the application of an individual's biological sex pursuant to any state law or rules and regulations, the following shall apply: (1) An individual's "sex" means such individual's biological sex, either male or female, at birth; (2) a "female" is an individual whose biological reproductive system is developed to produce ova, and a "male" is an individual whose biological reproductive system is developed to fertilize the ova of a  25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36SB 180 2 female; (3) the terms "woman" and "girl" refer to human females, and the terms "man" and "boy" refer to human males; (4) the term "mother" means a parent of the female sex, and the term "father" means a parent of the male sex; (5) with respect to biological sex, the term "equal" does not mean "same" or "identical"; and (6) with respect to biological sex, separate accommodations are not inherently unequal. (b) Laws and rules and regulations that distinguish between the sexes are subject to intermediate constitutional scrutiny. Intermediate constitutional scrutiny forbids unfair discrimination against similarly situated male and female individuals but allows the law to distinguish between the sexes where such distinctions are substantially related to important governmental objectives. Notwithstanding any provision of state law to the contrary, distinctions between the sexes with respect to athletics, prisons or other detention facilities, domestic violence shelters, rape crisis centers, locker rooms, restrooms and other areas where biology, safety or privacy are implicated that result in separate accommodations are substantially related to the important governmental objectives of protecting the health, safety and privacy of individuals in such circumstances. (c) Any school district, or public school thereof, and any state agency, department or office or political subdivision that collects vital statistics for the purpose of complying with anti-discrimination laws or for the purpose of gathering accurate public health, crime, economic or other data shall identify each individual who is part of the collected data set as either male or female at birth. Sec. 2. This act shall take effect and be in force from and after its publication in the statute book. 25 26 27 28 29 30UNOFFICIAL COPY 23 RS BR 943 Page 1 of 27 BR094300.100 - 943 - XXXX 2/7/2023 4:15 PM Jacketed AN ACT relating to education. 1 Be it enacted by the General Assembly of the Commonwealth of Kentucky: 2 SECTION 1. A NEW SECTION OF KRS CHAPTER 158 IS CREATED TO 3 READ AS FOLLOWS: 4 As used in Sections 1 to 6 of this Act: 5 (1) "Biological sex" means the physical condition of being male or female, as 6 determined by a person's unambiguous internal and ext ernal genitalia or, if 7 necessary, sex chromosomes present at birth, and formally recognized on the 8 person's original birth certificate or the child's school enrollment documentation; 9 (2) "Child" means a person who has not reached the age of eighteen (18); 10 (3) "Community standard state of dress" means the condition of being fully clothed, 11 or partially or fully unclothed in which the bodily coverage by opaque clothing is 12 appropriate as determined by the average adult citizen of the Commonwealth 13 applying conte mporary community standards of what is appropriate dress, given: 14 (a) The age, biological sex, and other demographic factors of the unclothed 15 person; 16 (b) The age, biological sex, familial relation, and other demographic factors of 17 persons able to view the p erson within the situational context; and 18 (c) The conditions of expectation of privacy within the situational context; 19 (4) "Parent" means any biological, foster, or adoptive parent, de facto custodian as 20 defined in KRS 403.270, legal guardian who has lega l custody of a child, or any 21 adult caregiver authorized to make school -related decisions for a child under 22 KRS 158.144, whose custody of the child has not been suspended or terminated 23 by a court order; 24 (5) "Public school" means any school district or publi c charter school organization, 25 any public school operated by those entities, the governing boards of those 26 entities, and the employees, agents, and officers of those entities; and 27 UNOFFICIAL COPY 23 RS BR 943 Page 2 of 27 BR094300.100 - 943 - XXXX 2/7/2023 4:15 PM Jacketed (6) "School enrollment documentation" means either: 1 (a) A certified copy of the child's birth certificate; or 2 (b) Other reliable proof of the child's identity, age, and biological sex and an 3 affidavit of the inability to produce a copy of the birth certificate as provided 4 upon enrollment of the child for the first time in any prim ary or secondary 5 school to fulfill the requirements of KRS 158.032. 6 SECTION 2. A NEW SECTION OF KRS CHAPTER 158 IS CREATED TO 7 READ AS FOLLOWS: 8 (1) As it relates to public education, the General Assembly hereby finds and declares 9 that: 10 (a) A parent of a child shall have the fundamental right to make decisions 11 concerning the child's care, custody, and control without obstruction or 12 interference from a public school. As it relates to public schools, this shall 13 include the: 14 1. Right to make decisions concerning the child's education, including 15 the right to cause the child to be educated in any manner that meets 16 the compulsory attendance requirements and exemptions established 17 in KRS 159.010 and 159.030 and in any other manner established by 18 statute or the Constitution of the Commonwealth of Kentucky; and 19 2. High duty and right to nurture and direct their children's destiny, 20 including their upbringing and education; mental, emotional, and 21 physical health care; and moral and reli gious development; 22 (b) The interests and role of parents in the care, custody, and control of their 23 children are implicit in the concept of ordered liberty, deeply embedded in 24 our nation's history and tradition, and among the unalienable rights 25 retained by the people under the Ninth Amendment to the Constitution of 26 the United States; 27 UNOFFICIAL COPY 23 RS BR 943 Page 3 of 27 BR094300.100 - 943 - XXXX 2/7/2023 4:15 PM Jacketed (c) A parent of a child in this Commonwealth has inalienable rights that are 1 more comprehensive than those listed in Sections 1 to 6 of this Act, unless 2 such rights have been l awfully waived or terminated; 3 (d) The Commonwealth has independent authority to protect the parental rights 4 of its citizens; and 5 (e) The rights recognized and the protections established in Sections 1 to 6 of 6 this Act as they are related to public school a re rooted in the right to due 7 process of law guaranteed pursuant to the Constitution of the United States. 8 (2) The public schools of the Commonwealth shall not violate a parent's 9 fundamental rights identified in Sections 1 to 6 of this Act. Any restriction of or 10 interference with these rights shall not be upheld unless it is demonstrated by 11 clear and convincing evidence to be: 12 (a) Essential to further a compelling governmental interest; and 13 (b) The least restrictive means available for the furthering of tha t compelling 14 governmental interest. 15 (3) To guard the rights established in Sections 1 to 6 of this Act, each local board of 16 education and charter school board of directors shall establish a process to 17 receive complaints regarding violations of those rights that includes: 18 (a) A designated recipient of complaints for each school; 19 (b) The procedure for submission of the complaint; 20 (c) Written confirmation to the parent that the complaint has been received 21 within five (5) business days of receipt of the complai nt; 22 (d) A written response to the complaint within thirty (30) business days of 23 receipt of the complaint that outlines how the school will resolve the 24 complaint or a written statement of the specific reasons for not resolving the 25 complaint; and 26 (e) A final written determination of the merits of the complaint and the actions 27 UNOFFICIAL COPY 23 RS BR 943 Page 4 of 27 BR094300.100 - 943 - XXXX 2/7/2023 4:15 PM Jacketed taken, if any, by the school to resolve the complaint within sixty (60) days 1 following the receipt of the complaint or the basis for taking no action. 2 (4) (a) After exhausting the complaint process established in subsection (3) of this 3 section without satisfactory resolution, or if the school does not issue the 4 final written determination within the time established under subsection (3) 5 of this section, a parent shall have a civil cause of action. 6 (b) The complaint shall be filed within sixty (60) days of the school's failure to 7 comply within the time established under subsection (3) of this section or 8 within sixty (60) days of the final written determination, whichever occurs 9 last. 10 (c) The action shall be brought in the Circuit Court of the county in which the 11 school is located or the parent resides. 12 (d) Remedies available to a parent under this subsection shall include: 13 1. Declaratory relief; 14 2. Injunctive relief to prevent or reme dy a violation of Sections 1 to 6 of 15 this Act or the effects of such a violation; 16 3. Compensatory damages for pecuniary or nonpecuniary losses; 17 4. Reasonable attorney's fees and costs; and 18 5. Any other appropriate relief. 19 (e) If a parent brings an unsucces sful civil action against a public school, the 20 parent shall not be required to pay any associated attorney's fees or costs 21 incurred by the public school. 22 (f) All claims shall be initiated within one (1) year of the violation. 23 (5) Nothing in Sections 1 to 6 of this Act shall be construed: 24 (a) To prescribe all rights held by the parent of a child in this state; or 25 (b) As altering the established presumption in favor of the constitutionality of 26 statutes and regulations. 27 UNOFFICIAL COPY 23 RS BR 943 Page 5 of 27 BR094300.100 - 943 - XXXX 2/7/2023 4:15 PM Jacketed (6) Any portion or section of Sections 1 to 6 of this Act declared invalid shall not 1 affect the validity of the remaining portions or sections of Sections 1 to 6 of this 2 Act. 3 SECTION 3. A NEW SECTION OF KRS CHAPTER 158 IS CREATED TO 4 READ AS FOLLOWS: 5 (1) In acc ordance with Section 2 of this Act, a parent shall have the following rights 6 as they relate to the parent's child and a public school: 7 (a) To access and review: 8 1. All education records relating to his or her minor child as provided in 9 KRS 160.700 to 160.7 30; 10 2. Any record associated with the selection or approval of any guest 11 lecturer, guest instructor, or outside presenter who participates in the 12 child's education; 13 3. Any records in the possession of the school relating to third -party 14 individuals and orga nizations contracted with the school that the child 15 attends; and 16 4. Any student well -being questionnaire or health screening form used 17 for research purposes; 18 (b) To provide consent prior to: 19 1. A well -being questionnaire or health screening form used for research 20 purposes being given to the child. A school shall not require a grant of 21 general consent to these questionnaires or forms by a parent, but shall 22 request consent specific to each question naire or form to be provided 23 to the child; 24 2. A biometric scan of the child is made, shared, or stored by a school; 25 3. Any record of the child's blood or deoxyribonucleic acid is created, 26 stored, or shared by a school, except as required by law and authori zed 27 UNOFFICIAL COPY 23 RS BR 943 Page 6 of 27 BR094300.100 - 943 - XXXX 2/7/2023 4:15 PM Jacketed pursuant to a court order; and 1 4. Each video or voice recording of the child is made by a school unless 2 it is made during or as part of a court -ordered proceeding or a 3 forensic interview in a criminal investigation or is to be used primarily 4 for the fo llowing purposes: 5 a. Documentation of regular classroom instruction, such as 6 participation in journalism; 7 b. Security or surveillance of buildings, grounds, or transportation 8 vehicles; or 9 c. Documentation of an extracurricular activity or public event 10 wher e recording is common practice; 11 (c) To know the people to whom and material to which the child is exposed 12 while on property owned, leased, or operated by the school; 13 (d) To know the identity of the people and entities, including but not limited to 14 organiza tions, agencies, third -party clearinghouses, and consultants, that 15 have accessed the child's education records, whether authorized by the 16 school or not; 17 (e) To access and review information identified in this section without entering 18 into a nondisclosure a greement; 19 (f) To access and review, in physical or digital format, and make copies of any 20 curricular documents, books, and other educational materials used in the 21 child's education; 22 (g) To receive, without request, any course syllabus or course reading lis t prior 23 to the child's beginning of the coursework or upon the child's enrollment in 24 the course; 25 (h) To visit his or her child at school during school hours unless the visit would 26 disrupt the educational process of other children; 27 UNOFFICIAL COPY 23 RS BR 943 Page 7 of 27 BR094300.100 - 943 - XXXX 2/7/2023 4:15 PM Jacketed (i) To be provided a cons ent form prior to, and give written prior consent: 1 1. To each specific nonemergency health care service provided by the 2 school to the child; 3 2. To each and every session of nonemergency mental health care service 4 provided by the school to the child; 5 3. That is not a grant of general consent but is specific to each service 6 provided to the child; 7 4. That shall not waive the parent's right to access the child's education 8 or health records or the right to receive notifications required by this 9 section; and 10 5. That, if not obtained from the parent, shall prohibit the school from 11 providing that service; 12 (j) To be notified: 13 1. At the beginning of each school year, or upon enrollment, of all 14 programs and health care services offered at the child's school; 15 2. Of maj or changes in his or her child's mental, emotional, and physical 16 health and well -being, including but not limited to: 17 a. Significant changes to the child's gender expression; 18 b. Any request to be referred to by a name, pronoun, or other 19 identifier inconsis tent with the school enrollment documentation 20 submitted in accordance to KRS 158.032; 21 c. Indicators of eating disorders; 22 d. Indicators of chemical dependency; 23 e. Evidence of pregnancy, whether the result of consensual or 24 nonconsensual sexual activity; 25 f. Evidence of self -harm; and 26 g. Evidence of suicidal or violent ideation or intention; 27 UNOFFICIAL COPY 23 RS BR 943 Page 8 of 27 BR094300.100 - 943 - XXXX 2/7/2023 4:15 PM Jacketed 3. At the beginning of the school year and upon a change of status, 1 whether th e child's school campus is assigned a school resource 2 officer or not; 3 4. Within one (1) business day of the school attaining knowledge, of the 4 occurrence of the following incidents on the campus of the school the 5 child attends: 6 a. Physical assault; 7 b. Sexu al assault; 8 c. Unlawful possession of a weapon on school property; 9 d. Unlawful drug use or possession; 10 e Police investigations, unless no report is requested by police; 11 f. Notice to the parent of the parent's child being involved in a 12 bullying incident, as defined in Section 7 of this Act; and 13 g. Regardless of the incident's location, serious crimes such as 14 capital offenses, felonies, or Class A misdemeanors, of which a 15 teacher or other school employee who works at the child's school 16 campus is charged or co nvicted; and 17 5. At the beginning of the school year or upon enrollment of a report 18 compiling the incidents outlined in subparagraph 4. of this paragraph 19 from the previous school year; 20 (k) To request and receive, without charge, one (1) copy of all informat ion 21 identified in this subsection related to the child; and 22 (l) The rights outlined in the Sections 4 and 5 of this Act. 23 (2) To guard the rights outlined in Sections 1 to 6 of this Act, each local board of 24 education or charter school board of directors sha ll take necessary actions and 25 shall adopt policies and procedures to: 26 (a) Notify the parents of each enrolled child at the beginning of the school year 27 UNOFFICIAL COPY 23 RS BR 943 Page 9 of 27 BR094300.100 - 943 - XXXX 2/7/2023 4:15 PM Jacketed or upon enrollment of the parental rights outlined in Sections 1 to 6 of this 1 Act; 2 (b) Ensure that no in formation relating to a child that requires prior consent 3 under Sections 1 to 6 of this Act is created, collected, stored, or shared 4 without the prior consent of the parent; 5 (c) Ensure that no service or activity relating to a child that requires prior 6 consent under Sections 1 to 6 of this Act is conducted without the prior 7 consent of the parent; 8 (d) Provide prompt notification without solicitation, request, or inquiry from a 9 parent as required by Sections 1 to 6 of this Act; 10 (e) Provide the opportunity to access, review, and receive in digital form, 11 without charge, any requested information involving a parent’s minor child 12 as permitted by Sections 1 to 6 of this Act, upon the written request of the 13 parent, within five (5) business days of the receipt of the request; 14 (f) Notify parents of major changes in their child's mental, emotional, and 15 physical health and well -being, including but not limited to those listed in 16 subsection (1)(j) of this section; 17 (g) Prohibit any teacher or other school employee from wit hholding any 18 information concerning a child’s academic record or mental, emotional, or 19 physical well -being, including but not limited to those referenced in 20 subsection (1)(j) of this section, from the child's parent; 21 (h) Prohibit any teacher or other schoo l employee from coercing or 22 discouraging a child from sharing any information concerning the child's 23 academic record or mental, emotional, or physical well -being with his or 24 her parent, including but not limited to those listed in subsection (1)(j) of 25 this section; 26 (i) Prohibit the funding of any professional development activity, consultant 27 UNOFFICIAL COPY 23 RS BR 943 Page 10 of 27 BR094300.100 - 943 - XXXX 2/7/2023 4:15 PM Jacketed services, trainings, or incentives, or the adoption of any policies, practices, 1 or procedures, that: 2 1. Advise, compel, or incentivize any teacher, school employee, or 3 presenter to use pronouns that are inconsistent with the information 4 on the child's school enrollment documentation; 5 2. Discourage, pu nish, or disadvantage a teacher, school employee, or 6 presenter in any way for refusal or failure to use a name or other 7 identifier in reference to a child that is inconsistent with the child’s 8 information listed on the school enrollment documentation; 9 3. Assert that possessing any set of immutable characteristics makes a 10 person in any way responsible for, or a contributor to, the suffering or 11 adverse conditions experienced by another group of people; or 12 4. Advise, compel, or incentivize any persons to: 13 a. Segregate or form affinity groups according to any protected 14 class; 15 b. Engage in any activity meant to separate persons based upon any 16 immutable characteristic with the intent or effect of ascribing 17 disadvantage, advantage, inferiority, or superiority; or 18 c. Assert that a person, simply by virtue of any immutable 19 characteristic, is inherently more valuable than another person 20 or better qualified to understand or empathize with persons with 21 that characteristic; and 22 (j) 1. Prohibit the imposition of any requi rement on any child as a condition 23 for school admittance or attendance, employment, participation in or 24 attendance at extra -curricular activities, or access or use of property 25 located in the Commonwealth of Kentucky, whether owned, leased, or 26 operated by t he institution, to: 27 UNOFFICIAL COPY 23 RS BR 943 Page 11 of 27 BR094300.100 - 943 - XXXX 2/7/2023 4:15 PM Jacketed a. Force the use of any type of medical device, including but not 1 limited to any type of facial coverings; or 2 b. Submit to any type of medical procedure or treatment, including 3 but not limited to any type of vaccination or testing unle ss 4 otherwise directed by a court of competent jurisdiction. 5 2. Nothing in this paragraph shall: 6 a. Contradict the requirements of KRS 158.035 regarding 7 certificates of immunization; 8 b. Apply to nonmedical safety equipment used as a precaution to 9 avoid bodi ly injuries in athletic activities, physical education 10 instruction, extracurricular activities, classroom instruction, or 11 demonstrations involving dangerous materials or activities; 12 c. Apply to a physical examinations or fitness required to 13 participate or resume participation in any interscholastic athletic 14 activity; or 15 d. Invalidate requirements, including those of students that have 16 curricular or work responsibilities, necessary for student 17 presence in a medical setting. 18 (3) The Kentucky Department of Edu cation and the Kentucky Board of Education 19 shall: 20 (a) Eliminate any administrative regulations or recommended practices or 21 procedures that are inconsistent with Sections 1 to 6 of this Act; and 22 (b) Develop and recommend best practices to facilitate complia nce by schools 23 with Sections 1 to 6 of this Act. 24 (4) A school shall not be required to adopt or comply with the recommended best 25 practices developed under subsection (3)(b) of this section, so long as the school 26 complies with Sections 1 to 6 of this Act. 27 UNOFFICIAL COPY 23 RS BR 943 Page 12 of 27 BR094300.100 - 943 - XXXX 2/7/2023 4:15 PM Jacketed SECTION 4. A NEW SECTION OF KRS CHAPTER 158 IS CREATED TO 1 READ AS FOLLOWS: 2 (1) As it relates to public schools, the General Assembly hereby finds and declares 3 that: 4 (a) Children have natural and normal concerns about bodi ly privacy while 5 partially or completely unclothed, and most children prefer that members of 6 the opposite biological sex not be present in those circumstances; 7 (b) A parent has the right, when entrusting the supervision of his or her child to 8 a school, to not have: 9 1. His or her child permitted to view persons of the opposite sex outside 10 of the community standard state of dress; 11 2. Persons of the opposite sex permitted to view his or her child outside 12 of the community standard state of dress; and 13 3. Persons of the opposite sex in the presence of his or her child where 14 there is a reasonable expectation of bodily privacy; 15 (c) Allowing students to share private quarters, restrooms, locker rooms, or 16 shower rooms where there is a reasonable expectation of bodily privacy, 17 which are reserved for students of a different biological sex creates: 18 1. A significant potential for disruptio n of school activities and unsafe 19 conditions; and 20 2. Potential embarrassment and shame to children; and 21 (d) Providing children who object to the use of private quarters, restrooms, 22 locker rooms, or shower rooms designated for the child's biological sex wit h 23 reasonable alternative accommodations, if and when available, avoids 24 potential complications and serves to protect their dignity and safety. 25 (2) To safeguard the rights recognized in subsection (1) of this section: 26 (a) Every school shall respect and pro tect the bodily privacy of children and 27 UNOFFICIAL COPY 23 RS BR 943 Page 13 of 27 BR094300.100 - 943 - XXXX 2/7/2023 4:15 PM Jacketed shall not compel or permit a student to be outside a community standard 1 state of dress in the presence, or within view of members of the opposite 2 biological sex; 3 (b) In the private areas identified in subsection (1) of this section where there is 4 a reasonable expectation of bodily privacy, school personnel shall provide 5 areas designated for students separated by their biological sex; and 6 (c) A student who informs school officials that the student's gender expression 7 is, or will be, different from the student's biological sex and whose parent 8 provides written consent to the school shall be provided with reasonable 9 alternative facility accommodations, if available. Reasonable facility 10 accommodations: 11 1. May include but a re not limited to access to single -stall restrooms or 12 the controlled use of faculty bathrooms, locker rooms, or shower 13 rooms; and 14 2. Shall not include the use of school restrooms, locker rooms, or shower 15 rooms designated for use by persons of the opposite biological sex, or 16 the use of private quarters with members of the opposite biological sex 17 who are not family members of the student. 18 (3) While accessing private quarters, restrooms, locker rooms, or shower rooms 19 designated for use by the child's biologica l sex where there is a reasonable 20 expectation of bodily privacy, a child who encounters a person of the opposite 21 biological sex shall have a private cause of action against the school if school 22 personnel: 23 (a) Authorized the encountered person to use the fa cilities of the opposite 24 biological sex in the same manner as the child; or 25 (b) Failed to take reasonable steps to prevent the encountered person from 26 using facilities of the opposite biological sex in the same manner as the 27 UNOFFICIAL COPY 23 RS BR 943 Page 14 of 27 BR094300.100 - 943 - XXXX 2/7/2023 4:15 PM Jacketed child. 1 (4) Any student, teacher , or employee required by the school or school personnel to 2 share private quarters where there is a reasonable expectation of bodily privacy 3 with a member of the opposite biological sex shall have a cause of action against 4 the school, unless the person sha ring the quarters is a family member of the 5 student, teacher, or employee, as applicable. 6 (5) Nothing in this section shall apply to the following persons: 7 (a) A child younger than six (6) years of age, who may be present in the 8 facilities designated for u se by the opposite biological sex of the child if 9 accompanied by the child's caregiver of designated biological sex; 10 (b) A person engaged in sanctioned inspection, maintenance, janitorial, or 11 custodial activities if reasonable precautions are made to preve nt being in 12 the presence of, or viewing, a person of the opposite sex; 13 (c) A medical professional engaging in the practices of the profession under the 14 accepted standard of care; 15 (d) A person rendering medical or other emergency services; or 16 (e) A person serving in a law enforcement or school safety capacity, including 17 but not limited to pursuing a fleeing criminal suspect, executing a duly 18 issued warrant, or conducting a school authorized activity. 19 SECTION 5. A NEW SECT ION OF KRS CHAPTER 158 IS CREATED TO 20 READ AS FOLLOWS: 21 (1) For the purposes of this section, "controversial subject matter" means an issue 22 that is a point made in the electoral platform of a political party as defined in 23 KRS 118.015 and is contested by the electoral platform of another political party 24 at the local, state, or federal level. 25 (2) The General Assembly hereby finds and declares that: 26 (a) The common school environment and interactions between teachers and 27 UNOFFICIAL COPY 23 RS BR 943 Page 15 of 27 BR094300.100 - 943 - XXXX 2/7/2023 4:15 PM Jacketed students in kindergarten through grade twe lve (12) are primarily intended 1 to facilitate the learning of approved curricula and development of approved 2 sets of skills; and 3 (b) The common school environment is not an appropriate place to engage in 4 teacher -led or teacher -promoted social or political advocacy with respect to 5 controversial subject matter. 6 (3) A parent has a right to have his or her child spend time at school primarily 7 learning approved curricula and developing approved sets of skills with no time 8 spent being indoctrinated into any part isan political position or being involved in 9 teacher -led or teacher -promoted social or political advocacy with respect to 10 controversial subject matter. 11 (4) In the school setting or while serving in the scope of duties of temporary, part - 12 time, or full -time employment at a school, a teacher, school employee, guest 13 lecturer, guest instructor, or outside presenter shall not: 14 (a) Discuss with or provide instruction to any stude nt in kindergarten through 15 grade eight (8) on the topics of sexual orientation, sexual preference, or 16 gender expression inconsistent with biological sex; 17 (b) Discuss with or provide instruction to any student in grades nine (9) 18 through twelve (12) the topi cs of sexual orientation, sexual preference, or 19 gender expression inconsistent with biological sex, unless required for 20 instruction of the school's approved curriculum for the course being taught; 21 (c) Discuss the person's own sexual orientation, sexual pre ference, or gender 22 expression that is inconsistent with his or her biological sex with any 23 student; or 24 (d) Display slogans, emblems, phrases, or symbols within view of any student 25 on school property that are associated with any sexual orientation, sexual 26 preference, or gender expression inconsistent with biological sex. 27 UNOFFICIAL COPY 23 RS BR 943 Page 16 of 27 BR094300.100 - 943 - XXXX 2/7/2023 4:15 PM Jacketed (5) In the school setting or while serving in the scope of duties of temporary, part - 1 time, or full -time employment at a school, a teacher, school employee, guest 2 lecturer, guest instructor, or outside presenter shall: 3 (a) Not endorse, support, or oppose any candidate or nominee for public office 4 or any elected or appointed official of the local, state, or federal 5 government; 6 (b) Not endorse, support, or oppose any pending, proposed, or enacte d 7 legislation or regulation at the local, state, or federal level in the presence of 8 students; 9 (c) Not endorse, support, or oppose any pending, proposed, or decided court 10 case or judicial action at the local, state, or federal level in the presence of 11 students; 12 (d) Not endorse, support, or oppose any pending, proposed, or executed 13 executive action at the local, state, or federal level in the presence of 14 students; 15 (e) Only introduce or discuss with students a controversial subject matter if it is 16 germane to the curriculum and topic of the course being taught and shall 17 not advocate in a partisan manner for a specific side; 18 (f) Not display slogans, emblems, phrases, flags, or symbols that are associated 19 with any controversial subject matter, including the confe derate flag, with 20 the exception of historical American, patriotic, war, or battle slogans, 21 emblems, phrases, flags, or symbols, even if they may have since acquired 22 secondary associations with controversial subject matter; 23 (g) Not segregate students or for m affinity groups of students according to any 24 protected class; 25 (h) Not engage in any activity meant to separate one (1) or more students based 26 upon any immutable characteristic with the intent or effect of ascribing 27 UNOFFICIAL COPY 23 RS BR 943 Page 17 of 27 BR094300.100 - 943 - XXXX 2/7/2023 4:15 PM Jacketed disadvantage, advantage, inferiority or superiority; 1 (i) Not assert that a person, simply by virtue of any immutable characteristic, is 2 inherently more valuable than others, or better qualified to understand, or 3 empathize with, persons with that characteristic; 4 (j) Not assert that possessing an y set of immutable characteristics makes a 5 person in any way responsible for, or a contributor to, the suffering or 6 adverse conditions experienced by another student or group of people; and 7 (k) Not encourage or coerce, or attempt to encourage or coerce, a child to 8 withhold any information about material or instruction presented to, or 9 conversation held with, the child from his or her parent. 10 (6) Notwithstanding the prohibitions on conduct in this section, a teacher, school 11 employee, guest lecturer, guest in structor, outside presenter, or student shall not 12 be compelled to endorse, affirm, support, oppose, or advocate for or against 13 anything in opposition to his or her sincerely held beliefs and convictions, 14 religious or otherwise, including but not limited to : 15 (a) Political candidates, parties, platforms, issues, judicial judgements, 16 legislation, regulation, executive order, or policies; 17 (b) Any position on controversial subject matter; 18 (c) Any position on a religious belief, dogma, doctrine, or practice; 19 (d) Any perspective on sexual orientation, sexual preference, or gender 20 expression; or 21 (e) The use of pronouns or other identifiers to refer to a person that are 22 inconsistent with the person's biological sex. 23 (7) In support of the rights outlined in this sect ion, each local board of education or 24 charter school board of directors shall adopt policies and procedures to ensure 25 that: 26 (a) No funds are expended for any professional development, trainings, or 27 UNOFFICIAL COPY 23 RS BR 943 Page 18 of 27 BR094300.100 - 943 - XXXX 2/7/2023 4:15 PM Jacketed incentives that instruct, advise, reward, or compel any te acher, school 1 employee, or presenter to take a particular position on, or advocate for or 2 against, anything listed in subsection (5) or (6) of this section; 3 (b) No professional advantage, disadvantage, incentive, disincentive, 4 promotion, demotion, reward, or penalty of any type is conferred or 5 contingent upon a teacher, school employee, or presenter’s willingness, 6 refusal, or failure to take a particular position on, or advocate for or 7 against, anything listed in subsection (5) or (6) of this section; 8 (c) All teachers, school employees, guest lecturers, guest instructors, and 9 outside presenters at a school are aware of the prohibitions of this section 10 and the penalties for willful violation; and 11 (d) All teachers, school employees, guest lecturers, guest ins tructors, and 12 outside presenters at a school comply with the prohibitions of this section 13 and that repeated willful violations are subject to dismissal. 14 (8) Nothing in this section shall prevent or limit: 15 (a) A school employee from conversationally referencing his or her own legal 16 spouse, without discussion of sexual conduct as defined in Section 5 of this 17 Act; 18 (b) The provision of one -on-one counseling or mental health or health care 19 services by an appropriate ly licensed professional employed to serve in that 20 capacity; or 21 (c) The requirement to address in an impartial and factual way topics that are 22 permissible under statute and approved by standard school district or public 23 charter school policies, and which s atisfy all administrative regulations, 24 including but not limited to those established in the standards for the course 25 being taught. 26 SECTION 6. A NEW SECTION OF KRS CHAPTER 158 IS CREATED TO 27 UNOFFICIAL COPY 23 RS BR 943 Page 19 of 27 BR094300.100 - 943 - XXXX 2/7/2023 4:15 PM Jacketed READ AS FOLLOWS: 1 (1) As used i n this section: 2 (a) "Distribute" means to transfer possession of or provide access to other 3 persons for observation, as might occur with matter in a common library, 4 performance, or digital streaming service, whether with or without 5 consideration; 6 (b) "Drag performance" means a performance in which a performer sings, lip 7 syncs, dances, reads, or otherwise performs before an audience for 8 entertainment while exhibiting a gender expression that is inconsistent with 9 the biological sex formally recognized on the performer's original birth 10 certificate using clothing, makeup, or other physical markers, and this 11 gender expression is a caricatured, advertised, or featured aspect of the 12 performance taken as a whole; 13 (c) "Harmful to minors" means that quality of any des cription, depiction, or 14 representation, in whatever form, of nudity, sexual conduct, sexual 15 excitement, or sadomasochistic abuse that: 16 1. Taken as a whole, appeals to the prurient interest of minors; 17 2. Is patently offensive to prevailing standards in the adult community as 18 a whole with respect to what is suitable for minors; and 19 3. Taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific 20 values for minors; 21 (d) "Matter" or "material" has the same meaning as matter in KRS 531.010; 22 (e) "Minor" has the same meaning as in KRS 500.080; 23 (f) "Nudity" or "nude" means the: 24 1. Showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, or 25 buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering; 26 2. Showing the female breast with less than a fully opaque cove ring of 27 UNOFFICIAL COPY 23 RS BR 943 Page 20 of 27 BR094300.100 - 943 - XXXX 2/7/2023 4:15 PM Jacketed any portion below the top of the nipple; 1 3. Depiction of covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state; 2 (g) "Obscene" means; 3 1. To the average person, applying contemporary community standards, 4 the predominant appeal of the matter, taken as a whole, is a prurient 5 interest in nudity, sexual conduct, excretion, sexual stimulation, or 6 sexual gratification; 7 2. The matter depicts or describes the nudity, sexual conduct, excretion, 8 sexual stimulation, or sexual gratification in a patently offensive way; 9 and 10 3. The matter, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political, 11 or scientific value; 12 (h) "Obscene imagery representing minors" means a visual depiction of any 13 kind produced by any means, including but not limited to a drawing, 14 carto on, sculpture, or painting, that: 15 1. a. Depicts a minor engaging in sexual conduct; and 16 b. Is obscene; or 17 2. a. Depicts an image that is or appears to be of a minor engaging in 18 graphic bestiality, sadomasochistic abuse, or sexual intercourse; 19 and 20 b. Lacks serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value; 21 (i) "Performance" means any physical human bodily ac tivity, including 22 singing, dancing, speaking, acting, simulating, or pantomiming or any play, 23 motion picture, exhibition, or presentation, whether picture, animated, live, 24 or recorded, that is intended for an audience of one (1) or more persons; 25 (j) "Pruri ent interest" means an erotic, lascivious, degrading, shameful, or 26 morbid interest in defecation, urination, nudity, sexual conduct, sexual 27 UNOFFICIAL COPY 23 RS BR 943 Page 21 of 27 BR094300.100 - 943 - XXXX 2/7/2023 4:15 PM Jacketed stimulation, or sexual gratification; 1 (k) "Sadomasochistic abuse" means flagellation, torture, or physical restraint 2 by or upon a person for the purpose of sexual gratification of either person; 3 (l) "Serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value" or "serious literary, 4 artistic, political, or scientific value for minors" means that a performance's 5 or matter 's main contribution and importance, taken on the whole 6 exclusively in one (1) of the specific and limited literary, artistic, political, or 7 scientific areas is sufficient that a reasonable person would determine it 8 substantially outweighs the totality of the government's compelling interests 9 in limiting access to matter or performances that, if made widely available, 10 would among other harms: 11 1. Weaken public morality; 12 2. Promote disorder; 13 3. Exacerbate the public health crises related to pornography recog nized 14 by the General Assembly; 15 4. Promote or normalize sexual or sadomasochistic abuse; and 16 5. In the case of performances or matter that make indecency, 17 pornography, obscenity, or harmful to minors content accessible to 18 children, infringe upon parental rights to control the upbringing and 19 education, mental, emotional, and physical health care, and moral and 20 religious development of their children. 21 Winning any award, prize, or other institutional recognition that considers 22 any factor, including but not limited to demographic characteristics of the 23 author, the author's historical significance, or the matter's social impact, 24 other than the purely literary, artistic, political, or scientific value of the 25 performance or matter in question, shall not factor i nto the assessment of 26 the matter for either adults or minors; 27 UNOFFICIAL COPY 23 RS BR 943 Page 22 of 27 BR094300.100 - 943 - XXXX 2/7/2023 4:15 PM Jacketed (m) "Sexual conduct" has the same meaning as in KRS 531.010 and shall 1 include: 2 1. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; 3 2. Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, or sodomy; 4 3. Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals or pubic region; 5 or 6 4. Fondling or other erotic touching of human buttocks or the female 7 breast; 8 (n) "Sexual excitement" means a condition of human male or female genitals 9 when in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal, or the sensual experiences 10 of humans engaging in or witnessing sexual conduct or nudity; 11 (o) "Sexual intercourse" has the same meaning as in KRS 510.010 and 12 includes "deviate sexual intercourse" as defined in KRS 510.010; a nd 13 (p) "Stripping" means any act which involves the intentional removal or 14 simulated removal of clothing in a sexual manner, or intentional nudity, for 15 the entertainment of one (1) or more individuals. 16 (2) A parent with the fundamental rights identified in Sections 1 to 6 of this Act also 17 has the right and reasonable expectation that his or her child will not be exposed 18 to or be given access to any pervasively vulgar or obscene matter or performance 19 harmful to minors, or any obscene imagery representing min ors. 20 (3) To safeguard the rights identified in subsection (2) of this section, each local 21 board of education or charter school board of directors shall take necessary 22 actions and adopt policies and procedures to: 23 (a) Take reasonable precautions to make ina ccessible, on any property owned, 24 leased, or operated by the public school, to any minor any pervasively 25 vulgar or obscene matter harmful to minors, obscene imagery representing 26 minors, or any performance that is harmful for minors, pervasively vulgar, 27 UNOFFICIAL COPY 23 RS BR 943 Page 23 of 27 BR094300.100 - 943 - XXXX 2/7/2023 4:15 PM Jacketed or obscene; and 1 (b) Prohibit on the site of on any property owned, leased, or operated by the 2 public school, any performance that is harmful to minors, drag 3 performance, pervasively vulgar performance, obscene performance, or any 4 performance involving sexual conduct, nudity, or stripping. 5 (4) Willful violation of this section by an employee of a school shall be a basis for 6 disciplinary action. 7 (5) In addition to the actions authorized under subsection (4) of this section, willful 8 violation of this section may also be the basis for criminal prosecution under KRS 9 Chapter 531 or any other applicable statute. 10 (6) No obscene matter, obscene imagery repre senting minors, matter or performance 11 that is harmful to minors, obscene performance, drag performance, stripping, or 12 pervasively vulgar matter or performance shall be deemed to have educational 13 value for minors in the Commonwealth. 14 (7) This section shall not prohibit the use of approved instructional material used in 15 public schools, provided that parents of a child are given advance notice of matter 16 or materials that are potentially harmful to minors in the planned instruction, 17 and parents are given the op portunity to remove the child, without penalty, from 18 the instruction if the instructional material: 19 (a) Is permissible under state law; 20 (b) Is approved by standard school district or public charter school policies; 21 and 22 (c) Satisfies all administrative regu lations for academic standards for the 23 course being taught. 24 Section 7. KRS 158.148 is amended to read as follows: 25 (1) A parent that has the fundamental rights established under Sections 1 to 6 of this 26 Act also has a righ t and reasonable expectation that his or her child will not be 27 UNOFFICIAL COPY 23 RS BR 943 Page 24 of 27 BR094300.100 - 943 - XXXX 2/7/2023 4:15 PM Jacketed bullied while at school, at school -sanctioned events, or on school -sponsored 1 transportation. To safeguard this right, a school board shall establish policies and 2 procedures in accordance with t his section to ensure that if a child is involved in 3 a bullying incident, the school will notify the parents of all circumstances 4 involved and take actions to provide support for the victim and to prevent further 5 bullying. 6 (2)[(1)] (a) As used in this sect ion, "bullying" means any unwanted verbal, physical, 7 or social behavior among students that involves a real or perceived power 8 imbalance and is repeated or has the potential to be repeated: 9 1. That occurs on school premises, on school -sponsored transporta tion, or 10 at a school -sponsored event; or 11 2. That disrupts the education process. 12 (b) This definition shall not be interpreted to prohibit civil exchange of opinions 13 or debate or cultural practices protected under the state or federal Constitution 14 where the opinion expressed does not otherwise materially or substantially 15 disrupt the education process. 16 (3)[(2)] In cooperation with the Kentucky Education Association, the Kentucky 17 School Boards Association, the Kentucky Association of School Administrators, 18 the Kentucky Association of Professional Educators, the Kentucky Association of 19 School Superintendents, the Parent -Teachers Association, the Kentucky Chamber 20 of Commerce, the Farm Bureau, members of the Interim Joint Committee on 21 Education, and other interest ed groups, and in collaboration with the Center for 22 School Safety, the Department of Education shall develop or update as needed and 23 distribute to all districts by August 31 of each even -numbered year, beginning 24 August 31, 2008: 25 (a) Statewide student disci pline guidelines to ensure safe schools, including the 26 definition of serious incident for the reporting purposes as identified in KRS 27 UNOFFICIAL COPY 23 RS BR 943 Page 25 of 27 BR094300.100 - 943 - XXXX 2/7/2023 4:15 PM Jacketed 158.444; 1 (b) Recommendations designed to improve the learning environment and school 2 climate, parental and community invol vement in the schools, and student 3 achievement; and 4 (c) A model policy to implement the provisions of this section and KRS 158.156, 5 158.444, 525.070, and 525.080. 6 (4)[(3)] The department shall obtain statewide data on major discipline problems and 7 reasons why students drop out of school. In addition, the department, in 8 collaboration with the Center for School Safety, shall identify successful strategies 9 currently being used in programs in Kentucky and in other states and shall 10 incorporate those strategies i nto the statewide guidelines and the recommendations 11 under subsection (3)[(2)] of this section. 12 (5)[(4)] Copies of the discipline guidelines shall be distributed to all school districts. 13 The statewide guidelines shall contain broad principles and legal requirements to 14 guide local districts in developing their own discipline code and school councils in 15 the sel ection of discipline and classroom management techniques under KRS 16 158.154; and in the development of the district -wide safety plan. 17 (6)[(5)] (a) Each local board of education shall be responsible for formulating a 18 code of acceptable behavior and disciplin e to apply to the students in each 19 school operated by the board. The code shall be updated no less frequently 20 than every two (2) years, with the first update being completed by November 21 30, 2008. 22 (b) The superintendent, or designee, shall be responsible fo r overall 23 implementation and supervision, and each school principal shall be 24 responsible for administration and implementation within each school. Each 25 school council shall select and implement the appropriate discipline and 26 classroom management techniques necessary to carry out the code. The board 27 UNOFFICIAL COPY 23 RS BR 943 Page 26 of 27 BR094300.100 - 943 - XXXX 2/7/2023 4:15 PM Jacketed shall establish a process for a two -way communication system for teachers 1 and other employees to notify a principal, supervisor, or other administrator of 2 an existing emergency. 3 (c) The code shall prohibit bullyi ng. 4 (d) The code shall contain the type of behavior expected from each student, the 5 consequences of failure to obey the standards, and the importance of the 6 standards to the maintenance of a safe learning environment where orderly 7 learning is possible and encouraged. 8 (e) The code shall contain: 9 1. Procedures for identifying, documenting, and reporting incidents of 10 bullying, incidents of violations of the code, and incidents for which 11 reporting is required under KRS 158.156 , including but not limited to 12 the appropriate order of reporting to staff and escalation to staff if the 13 incidents persist ; 14 2. Procedures for investigating and responding to a complaint or a report of 15 bullying or a violation of the code, or of an incident for which reporting 16 is required un der KRS 158.156, including but not limited to specific 17 time requirements for beginning and completing an investigation; 18 3. Procedures for the appeal and review of each incident, including but 19 not limited to specific time requirements; 20 4. Procedures for [including] reporting incidents to the parents, legal 21 guardians, or other persons exercising custodial control or supervision o f 22 the students involved , including the actions to be taken to prevent any 23 possible future acts of bullying or retaliation ; 24 5. Procedures for providing support for the victim and assessing the need 25 for protection of the victim; 26 6.[3]. A strategy or method o f protecting from retaliation a complainant or 27 UNOFFICIAL COPY 23 RS BR 943 Page 27 of 27 BR094300.100 - 943 - XXXX 2/7/2023 4:15 PM Jacketed person reporting an incident of bullying, a violation of the code, or an 1 incident for which reporting is required under KRS 158.156; 2 7.[4.] A process for informing students, parents, legal guardians, or other 3 persons exercising custodial control or supervision, and school 4 employees of the requirements of the code and the provisions of this 5 section and KRS 158.156, 158.444, 525.070, and 525.080, including 6 training for school employees; and 7 8.[5.] Information reg arding the consequences of bullying and violating the 8 code and violations reportable under KRS 158.154, 158.156, or 158.444. 9 (f) The principal of each school shall apply the code of behavior and discipline 10 uniformly and fairly to each student at the school without partiality or 11 discrimination. 12 (g) A copy of the code of behavior and discipline adopted by the board of 13 education shall be posted at each school. Guidance counselors shall be 14 provided copies for discussion with students. The code shall be referenc ed in 15 all school handbooks. All school employees and parents, legal guardians, or 16 other persons exercising custodial control or supervision shall be provided 17 copies of the code. 18 Section 8. Section 1 to 6 of this Act shal l be known as the Childhood Protection 19 in Education Act. 20 103RD GENERAL ASSEMBLY State of Illinois 2023 and 2024 SB1659 Introduced 2/8/2023, by Sen. Andrew S. Chesney SYNOPSIS AS INTRODUCED: 105 ILCS 5/10-20.85 new105 ILCS 5/34-18.82 new Amends the School Code. Provides that school districts may regulate and restrict access to public restrooms, locker rooms, dressing rooms, and other similar places on the basis of biological sex and may also adopt a policy that provides for gender neutral or alternative facilities for students, staff, and members of the public, as the school district deems appropriate. Provides that school districts are not required to: (1) adopt a policy that restricts or regulates access to public restrooms, locker rooms, dressing rooms, and other similar places on the basis of biological sex; (2) adopt a policy that includes the facilitation of gender neutral or alternative facilities for students, staff, and members of the public; (3) limit access by a minor accompanied by an adult guardian of the opposite sex into a specified facility appropriate for the adult guardian; (4) prohibit a person with disabilities from using a specified facility appropriate to the biological sex of either the person with disabilities or of an adult caretaker providing assistance; (5) prohibit access to these facilities by custodial staff, school staff, or other persons in an emergency situation; or (6) alter their current policies on access to public restrooms, locker rooms, dressing rooms, and other similar places. LRB103 27389 RJT 53761 b A BILL FOR SB1659LRB103 27389 RJT 53761 b 1 AN ACT concerning education. 2 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Illinois, 3represented in the General Assembly: 4 Section 5. The School Code is amended by adding Sections 510-20.85 and 34-18.82 as follows: 6 (105 ILCS 5/10-20.85 new)7 Sec. 10-20.85. School restroom access.8 (a) In this Section, "biological sex" means the physical 9condition of being male or female, as determined by a person's 10chromosomes, assigned at birth.11 (b) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a school 12district may regulate and restrict access to public restrooms, 13locker rooms, dressing rooms, and other similar places on the 14basis of biological sex and may adopt a policy that provides 15for gender neutral or alternative facilities for students, 16staff, and members of the public, as the school district deems 17appropriate. 18 (c) Nothing in this Section shall be construed to in any 19way require a school district to: 20 (1) adopt a policy that restricts or regulates access 21 to public restrooms, locker rooms, dressing rooms, and 22 other similar places on the basis of biological sex;23 (2) adopt a policy that includes the facilitation of SB1659- 2 -LRB103 27389 RJT 53761 b 1 gender neutral or alternative facilities for students, 2 staff, and members of the public;3 (3) limit access by a minor accompanied by an adult 4 guardian of the opposite sex into a specified facility 5 appropriate for the adult guardian;6 (4) prohibit a person with disabilities from using a 7 specified facility appropriate to the biological sex of 8 either the disabled person or of an adult caretaker 9 providing assistance;10 (5) prohibit access to these facilities by custodial 11 staff, school staff, or other persons in an emergency 12 situation; or13 (6) alter its current policies on access to public 14 restrooms, locker rooms, dressing rooms, and other similar 15 places. 16 (105 ILCS 5/34-18.82 new)17 Sec. 34-18.82. School restroom access.18 (a) In this Section, "biological sex" means the physical 19condition of being male or female, as determined by a person's 20chromosomes, assigned at birth.21 (b) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the school 22district may regulate and restrict access to public restrooms, 23locker rooms, dressing rooms, and other similar places on the 24basis of biological sex and may adopt a policy that provides 25for gender neutral or alternative facilities for students, SB1659- 3 -LRB103 27389 RJT 53761 b 1staff, and members of the public, as the school district deems 2appropriate. 3 (c) Nothing in this Section shall be construed to in any 4way require the school district to: 5 (1) adopt a policy that restricts or regulates access 6 to public restrooms, locker rooms, dressing rooms, and 7 other similar places on the basis of biological sex;8 (2) adopt a policy that includes the facilitation of 9 gender neutral or alternative facilities for students, 10 staff, and members of the public;11 (3) limit access by a minor accompanied by an adult 12 guardian of the opposite sex into a specified facility 13 appropriate for the adult guardian;14 (4) prohibit a person with disabilities from using a 15 specified facility appropriate to the biological sex of 16 either the disabled person or of an adult caretaker 17 providing assistance;18 (5) prohibit access to these facilities by custodial 19 staff, school staff, or other persons in an emergency 20 situation; or21 (6) alter its current policies on access to public 22 restrooms, locker rooms, dressing rooms, and other similar 23 places. UNOFFICIAL COPY 23 RS BR 1276 Page 1 of 27 XXXX 2/8/2023 10:53 AM Jacketed AN ACT relating to education. 1 Be it enacted by the General Assembly of the Commonwealth of Kentucky: 2 SECTION 1. A NEW SECTION OF KRS CHAPTER 158 IS CREATED TO 3 READ AS FOLLOWS: 4 As used in Sections 1 to 6 and 7 of this Act: 5 (1) "Biological sex" means the physical condition of being male or female, as 6 determined by a person's unambiguous internal and external genit alia or, if 7 necessary, sex chromosomes present at birth, and formally recognized on the 8 person's original birth certificate or the child's school enrollment documentation; 9 (2) "Child" means a person who has not reached the age of eighteen (18); 10 (3) "Community standard state of dress" means the condition of being fully clothed, 11 or partially or fully unclothed in which the bodily coverage by opaque clothing is 12 appropriate as determined by the average adult citizen of the Commonwealth 13 applying contempor ary community standards of what is appropriate dress, given: 14 (a) The age, biological sex, and other demographic factors of the unclothed 15 person; 16 (b) The age, biological sex, familial relation, and other demographic factors of 17 persons able to view the perso n within the situational context; and 18 (c) The conditions of expectation of privacy within the situational context; 19 (4) "Parent" means any biological, foster, or adoptive parent, de facto custodian as 20 defined in KRS 403.270, legal guardian who has legal cu stody of a child, or any 21 adult caregiver authorized to make school -related decisions for a child under 22 KRS 158.144, whose custody of the child has not been suspended or terminated 23 by a court order; 24 (5) "Public school" means any school district or public ch arter school organization, 25 any public school operated by those entities, the governing boards of those 26 entities, and the employees, agents, and officers of those entities; and 27 UNOFFICIAL COPY 23 RS BR 1276 Page 2 of 27 XXXX 2/8/2023 10:53 AM Jacketed (6) "School enrollment documentation" means either: 1 (a) A certified copy of the child's birth certificate; or 2 (b) Other reliable proof of the child's identity, age, and biological sex and an 3 affidavit of the inability to produce a copy of the birth certificate as provided 4 upon enrollment of the child for the first time in any primary or secondary 5 school to fulfill the requirements of KRS 158.032. 6 SECTION 2. A NEW SECTION OF KRS CHAPTER 158 IS CREATED TO 7 READ AS FOLLOWS: 8 (1) As it relates to public education, the General Assembly hereby finds and decl ares 9 that: 10 (a) A parent of a child shall have the fundamental right to make decisions 11 concerning the child's care, custody, and control without obstruction or 12 interference from a public school. As it relates to public schools, this shall 13 include the: 14 1. Right to make decisions concerning the child's education, including 15 the right to cause the child to be educated in any manner that meets 16 the compulsory attendance requirements and exemptions established 17 in KRS 159.010 and 159.030 and in any other manner esta blished by 18 statute or the Constitution of the Commonwealth of Kentucky; and 19 2. High duty and right to nurture and direct their children's destiny, 20 including their upbringing and education; mental, emotional, and 21 physical health care; and moral and religiou s development; 22 (b) The interests and role of parents in the care, custody, and control of their 23 children are implicit in the concept of ordered liberty, deeply embedded in 24 our nation's history and tradition, and among the unalienable rights 25 retained by the people under the Ninth Amendment to the Constitution of 26 the United States; 27 UNOFFICIAL COPY 23 RS BR 1276 Page 3 of 27 XXXX 2/8/2023 10:53 AM Jacketed (c) A parent of a child in this Commonwealth has inalienable rights that are 1 more comprehensive than those listed in Sections 1 to 6 and 7 of this Act, 2 unless such rights have been lawfully waived or terminated; 3 (d) The Commonwealth has independent authority to protect the parental rights 4 of its citizens; and 5 (e) The rights recognized and the protections established in Sections 1 to 6 and 6 7 of this Act as they are related to public school are rooted in the right to 7 due process of law guaranteed pursuant to the Constitution of the United 8 States. 9 (2) The public schools of the Commonwealth shall not violate a parent's 10 fundamental rights identified in Sections 1 to 6 and 7 of this Act. A ny restriction 11 of or interference with these rights shall not be upheld unless it is demonstrated 12 by clear and convincing evidence to be: 13 (a) Essential to further a compelling governmental interest; and 14 (b) The least restrictive means available for the fur thering of that compelling 15 governmental interest. 16 (3) To guard the rights established in Sections 1 to 6 and 7 of this Act, each local 17 board of education and charter school board of directors shall establish a process 18 to receive complaints regarding violat ions of those rights that includes: 19 (a) A designated recipient of complaints for each school; 20 (b) The procedure for submission of the complaint; 21 (c) Written confirmation to the parent that the complaint has been received 22 within five (5) business days of re ceipt of the complaint; 23 (d) A written response to the complaint within thirty (30) business days of 24 receipt of the complaint that outlines how the school will resolve the 25 complaint or a written statement of the specific reasons for not resolving the 26 compla int; and 27 UNOFFICIAL COPY 23 RS BR 1276 Page 4 of 27 XXXX 2/8/2023 10:53 AM Jacketed (e) A final written determination of the merits of the complaint and the actions 1 taken, if any, by the school to resolve the complaint within sixty (60) days 2 following the receipt of the complaint or the basis for taking no action. 3 (4) (a) After exhausting the complaint process established in subsectio n (3) of this 4 section without satisfactory resolution, or if the school does not issue the 5 final written determination within the time established under subsection (3) 6 of this section, a parent shall have a civil cause of action. 7 (b) The complaint shall be filed within sixty (60) days of the school's failure to 8 comply within the time established under subsection (3) of this section or 9 within sixty (60) days of the final written determination, whichever occurs 10 last. 11 (c) The action shall be brought in the Cir cuit Court of the county in which the 12 school is located or the parent resides. 13 (d) Remedies available to a parent under this subsection shall include: 14 1. Declaratory relief; 15 2. Injunctive relief to prevent or remedy a violation of Sections 1 to 6 or 16 7 of t his Act or the effects of such a violation; 17 3. Compensatory damages for pecuniary or nonpecuniary losses; 18 4. Reasonable attorney's fees and costs; and 19 5. Any other appropriate relief. 20 (e) If a parent brings an unsuccessful civil action against a public sch ool, the 21 parent shall not be required to pay any associated attorney's fees or costs 22 incurred by the public school. 23 (f) All claims shall be initiated within one (1) year of the violation. 24 (5) Nothing in Sections 1 to 6 and 7 of this Act shall be construed: 25 (a) To prescribe all rights held by the parent of a child in this state; or 26 (b) As altering the established presumption in favor of the constitutionality of 27 UNOFFICIAL COPY 23 RS BR 1276 Page 5 of 27 XXXX 2/8/2023 10:53 AM Jacketed statutes and regulations. 1 (6) Any portion or section of Sections 1 to 6 and 7 of this Act declared invalid shall 2 not affect the validity of the remaining portions or sections of Sections 1 to 6 and 3 7 of this Act. 4 SECTION 3. A NEW SECTION OF KRS CHAPTER 158 IS CREATED TO 5 READ AS FOLLOWS: 6 (1) In accordance with Section 2 of this Act, a parent shall have the following rights 7 as they relate to the parent's child and a public school: 8 (a) To access and review: 9 1. All education records relating to his or her minor child as provided in 10 KRS 160.700 to 160.730; 11 2. Any record as sociated with the selection or approval of any guest 12 lecturer, guest instructor, or outside presenter who participates in the 13 child's education; 14 3. Any records in the possession of the school relating to third -party 15 individuals and organizations contracted with the school that the child 16 attends; and 17 4. Any student well -being questionnaire or health screening form used 18 for research purposes; 19 (b) To provide consent prior to: 20 1. A well -being questionnaire or health screening form used for research 21 purposes being given to the child. A school shall not require a grant of 22 general consent to these questionnaires or forms by a parent, but shall 23 request consent specific to each question naire or form to be provided 24 to the child; 25 2. A biometric scan of the child is made, shared, or stored by a school; 26 3. Any record of the child's blood or deoxyribonucleic acid is created, 27 UNOFFICIAL COPY 23 RS BR 1276 Page 6 of 27 XXXX 2/8/2023 10:53 AM Jacketed stored, or shared by a school, except as required by law and authori zed 1 pursuant to a court order; and 2 4. Each video or voice recording of the child is made by a school unless 3 it is made during or as part of a court -ordered proceeding or a 4 forensic interview in a criminal investigation or is to be used primarily 5 for the fo llowing purposes: 6 a. Documentation of regular classroom instruction, such as 7 participation in journalism; 8 b. Security or surveillance of buildings, grounds, or transportation 9 vehicles; or 10 c. Documentation of an extracurricular activity or public event 11 wher e recording is common practice; 12 (c) To know the people to whom and material to which the child is exposed 13 while on property owned, leased, or operated by the school; 14 (d) To know the identity of the people and entities, including but not limited to 15 organiza tions, agencies, third -party clearinghouses, and consultants, that 16 have accessed the child's education records, whether authorized by the 17 school or not; 18 (e) To access and review information identified in this section without entering 19 into a nondisclosure a greement; 20 (f) To access and review, in physical or digital format, and make copies of any 21 curricular documents, books, and other educational materials used in the 22 child's education; 23 (g) To receive, without request, any course syllabus or course reading lis t prior 24 to the child's beginning of the coursework or upon the child's enrollment in 25 the course; 26 (h) To visit his or her child at school during school hours unless the visit would 27 UNOFFICIAL COPY 23 RS BR 1276 Page 7 of 27 XXXX 2/8/2023 10:53 AM Jacketed disrupt the educational process of other children; 1 (i) To be provided a cons ent form prior to, and give written prior consent: 2 1. To each specific nonemergency health care service provided by the 3 school to the child; 4 2. To each and every session of nonemergency mental health care service 5 provided by the school to the child; 6 3. That is not a grant of general consent but is specific to each service 7 provided to the child; 8 4. That shall not waive the parent's right to access the child's education 9 or health records or the right to receive notifications required by this 10 section; and 11 5. That, if not obtained from the parent, shall prohibit the school from 12 providing that service; 13 (j) To be notified: 14 1. At the beginning of each school year, or upon enrollment, of all 15 programs and health care services offered at the child's school; 16 2. Of maj or changes in his or her child's mental, emotional, and physical 17 health and well -being, including but not limited to: 18 a. Significant changes to the child's gender expression; 19 b. Any request to be referred to by a name, pronoun, or other 20 identifier inconsis tent with the school enrollment documentation 21 submitted in accordance to KRS 158.032; 22 c. Indicators of eating disorders; 23 d. Indicators of chemical dependency; 24 e. Evidence of pregnancy, whether the result of consensual or 25 nonconsensual sexual activity; 26 f. Evidence of self -harm; and 27 UNOFFICIAL COPY 23 RS BR 1276 Page 8 of 27 XXXX 2/8/2023 10:53 AM Jacketed g. Evidence of suicidal or violent ideation or intention; 1 3. At the beginning of the school year and upon a change of status, 2 whether th e child's school campus is assigned a school resource 3 officer or not; 4 4. Within one (1) business day of the school attaining knowledge, of the 5 occurrence of the following incidents on the campus of the school the 6 child attends: 7 a. Physical assault; 8 b. Sexu al assault; 9 c. Unlawful possession of a weapon on school property; 10 d. Unlawful drug use or possession; 11 e Police investigations, unless no report is requested by police; 12 f. Notice to the parent of the parent's child being involved in a 13 bullying incident, as defined in Section 7 of this Act; and 14 g. Regardless of the incident's location, serious crimes such as 15 capital offenses, felonies, or Class A misdemeanors, of which a 16 teacher or other school employee who works at the child's school 17 campus is charged or co nvicted; and 18 5. At the beginning of the school year or upon enrollment of a report 19 compiling the incidents outlined in subparagraph 4. of this paragraph 20 from the previous school year; 21 (k) To request and receive, without charge, one (1) copy of all informat ion 22 identified in this subsection related to the child; and 23 (l) The rights outlined in the Sections 1 to 6 and 7 of this Act. 24 (2) To guard the rights outlined in Sections 1 to 6 and 7 of this Act, each local board 25 of education or charter school board of di rectors shall take necessary actions and 26 shall adopt policies and procedures to: 27 UNOFFICIAL COPY 23 RS BR 1276 Page 9 of 27 XXXX 2/8/2023 10:53 AM Jacketed (a) Notify the parents of each enrolled child at the beginning of the school year 1 or upon enrollment of the parental rights outlined in Sections 1 to 6 and 7 2 of this Act; 3 (b) Ensure that no information relating to a child that requires prior consent 4 under Sections 1 to 6 of this Act is created, collected, stored, or shared 5 without the prior consent of the parent; 6 (c) Ensure that no service or activity relating to a child that r equires prior 7 consent under Sections 1 to 6 of this Act is conducted without the prior 8 consent of the parent; 9 (d) Provide prompt notification without solicitation, request, or inquiry from a 10 parent as required by Sections 1 to 6 and 7 of this Act; 11 (e) Prov ide the opportunity to access, review, and receive in digital form, 12 without charge, any requested information involving a parent’s minor child 13 as permitted by Sections 1 to 6 of this Act, upon the written request of the 14 parent, within five (5) business day s of the receipt of the request; 15 (f) Notify parents of major changes in their child's mental, emotional, and 16 physical health and well -being, including but not limited to those listed in 17 subsection (1)(j) of this section; 18 (g) Prohibit any teacher or other s chool employee from withholding any 19 information concerning a child’s academic record or mental, emotional, or 20 physical well -being, including but not limited to those referenced in 21 subsection (1)(j) of this section, from the child's parent; 22 (h) Prohibit any teacher or other school employee from coercing or 23 discouraging a child from sharing any information concerning the child's 24 academic record or mental, emotional, or physical well -being with his or 25 her parent, including but not limited to those listed in su bsection (1)(j) of 26 this section; 27 UNOFFICIAL COPY 23 RS BR 1276 Page 10 of 27 XXXX 2/8/2023 10:53 AM Jacketed (i) Prohibit the funding of any professional development activity, consultant 1 services, trainings, or incentives, or the adoption of any policies, practices, 2 or procedures, that: 3 1. Advise, compel, or incentivize any teache r, school employee, or 4 presenter to use pronouns that are inconsistent with the information 5 on the child's school enrollment documentation; 6 2. Discourage, punish, or disadvantage a teacher, school employee, or 7 presenter in any way for refusal or failure to use a name or other 8 identifier in reference to a child that is inconsistent with the child’s 9 information listed on the school enrollment docum entation; 10 3. Assert that possessing any set of immutable characteristics makes a 11 person in any way responsible for, or a contributor to, the suffering or 12 adverse conditions experienced by another group of people; or 13 4. Advise, compel, or incentivize any pe rsons to: 14 a. Segregate or form affinity groups according to any protected 15 class; 16 b. Engage in any activity meant to separate persons based upon any 17 immutable characteristic with the intent or effect of ascribing 18 disadvantage, advantage, inferiority, or su periority; or 19 c. Assert that a person, simply by virtue of any immutable 20 characteristic, is inherently more valuable than another person 21 or better qualified to understand or empathize with persons with 22 that characteristic; and 23 (j) 1. Prohibit the impositio n of any requirement on any child as a condition 24 for school admittance or attendance, employment, participation in or 25 attendance at extra -curricular activities, or access or use of property 26 located in the Commonwealth of Kentucky, whether owned, leased, or 27 UNOFFICIAL COPY 23 RS BR 1276 Page 11 of 27 XXXX 2/8/2023 10:53 AM Jacketed operated by the institution, to: 1 a. Force the use of any type of medical device, including but not 2 limited to any type of facial coverings; or 3 b. Submit to any type of medical procedure or treatment, including 4 but not limited to any type of vaccination o r testing unless 5 otherwise directed by a court of competent jurisdiction. 6 2. Nothing in this paragraph shall: 7 a. Contradict the requirements of KRS 158.035 regarding 8 certificates of immunization; 9 b. Apply to nonmedical safety equipment used as a precaution to 10 avoid bodily injuries in athletic activities, physical education 11 instruction, extracurricular activities, classroom instruction, or 12 demonstrations involving dangerous materials or activities; 13 c. Apply to a physical examinations or fitness required to 14 participate or resume participation in any interscholastic athletic 15 activity; or 16 d. Invalidate requirements, including those of students that have 17 curricular or work responsibilities, necessary for student 18 presence in a medical setting. 19 (3) The Kentucky Dep artment of Education and the Kentucky Board of Education 20 shall: 21 (a) Eliminate any administrative regulations or recommended practices or 22 procedures that are inconsistent with Sections 1 to 6 and 7 of this Act; and 23 (b) Develop and recommend best practices t o facilitate compliance by schools 24 with Sections 1 to 6 and 7 of this Act. 25 (4) A school shall not be required to adopt or comply with the recommended best 26 practices developed under subsection (3)(b) of this section, so long as the school 27 UNOFFICIAL COPY 23 RS BR 1276 Page 12 of 27 XXXX 2/8/2023 10:53 AM Jacketed complies with Sect ions 1 to 6 and 7 of this Act. 1 SECTION 4. A NEW SECTION OF KRS CHAPTER 158 IS CREATED TO 2 READ AS FOLLOWS: 3 (1) As it relates to public schools, the General Assembly hereby finds and declares 4 that: 5 (a) Children have natura l and normal concerns about bodily privacy while 6 partially or completely unclothed, and most children prefer that members of 7 the opposite biological sex not be present in those circumstances; 8 (b) A parent has the right, when entrusting the supervision of h is or her child to 9 a school, to not have: 10 1. His or her child permitted to view persons of the opposite sex outside 11 of the community standard state of dress; 12 2. Persons of the opposite sex permitted to view his or her child outside 13 of the community standar d state of dress; and 14 3. Persons of the opposite sex in the presence of his or her child where 15 there is a reasonable expectation of bodily privacy; 16 (c) Allowing students to share private quarters, restrooms, locker rooms, or 17 shower rooms where there is a reasonable expectation of bodily privacy, 18 which are reserved for students of a different biological sex creates: 19 1. A significant potential for disruptio n of school activities and unsafe 20 conditions; and 21 2. Potential embarrassment and shame to children; and 22 (d) Providing children who object to the use of private quarters, restrooms, 23 locker rooms, or shower rooms designated for the child's biological sex wit h 24 reasonable alternative accommodations, if and when available, avoids 25 potential complications and serves to protect their dignity and safety. 26 (2) To safeguard the rights recognized in subsection (1) of this section: 27 UNOFFICIAL COPY 23 RS BR 1276 Page 13 of 27 XXXX 2/8/2023 10:53 AM Jacketed (a) Every school shall respect and pro tect the bodily privacy of children and 1 shall not compel or permit a student to be outside a community standard 2 state of dress in the presence, or within view of members of the opposite 3 biological sex; 4 (b) In the private areas identified in subsection (1) of this section where there is 5 a reasonable expectation of bodily privacy, school personnel shall provide 6 areas designated for students separated by their biological sex; and 7 (c) A student who informs school officials that the student's gender expression 8 is, or will be, different from the student's biological sex and whose parent 9 provides written consent to the school shall be provided with reasonable 10 alternative facility accommodations, if available. Reasonable alternative 11 facility accommodations: 12 1. May i nclude but are not limited to access to single -stall restrooms or 13 the controlled use of faculty bathrooms, locker rooms, or shower 14 rooms; and 15 2. Shall not include the use of school restrooms, locker rooms, or shower 16 rooms designated for use by persons of t he opposite biological sex, or 17 the use of private quarters with members of the opposite biological sex 18 who are not family members of the student. 19 (3) While accessing private quarters, restrooms, locker rooms, or shower rooms 20 designated for use by the child 's biological sex where there is a reasonable 21 expectation of bodily privacy, a child who encounters a person of the opposite 22 biological sex shall have a private cause of action against the school if school 23 personnel: 24 (a) Authorized the encountered person t o use the facilities of the opposite 25 biological sex in the same manner as the child; or 26 (b) Failed to take reasonable steps to prevent the encountered person from 27 UNOFFICIAL COPY 23 RS BR 1276 Page 14 of 27 XXXX 2/8/2023 10:53 AM Jacketed using facilities of the opposite biological sex in the same manner as the 1 child. 2 (4) Any stud ent, teacher, or employee required by the school or school personnel to 3 share private quarters where there is a reasonable expectation of bodily privacy 4 with a member of the opposite biological sex shall have a cause of action against 5 the school, unless th e person sharing the quarters is a family member of the 6 student, teacher, or employee, as applicable. 7 (5) Nothing in this section shall apply to the following persons: 8 (a) A child younger than six (6) years of age, who may be present in the 9 facilities desi gnated for use by the opposite biological sex of the child if 10 accompanied by the child's caregiver of designated biological sex; 11 (b) A person engaged in sanctioned inspection, maintenance, janitorial, or 12 custodial activities if reasonable precautions are m ade to prevent being in 13 the presence of, or viewing, a person of the opposite sex; 14 (c) A medical professional engaging in the practices of the profession under the 15 accepted standard of care; 16 (d) A person rendering medical or other emergency services; or 17 (e) A person serving in a law enforcement or school safety capacity, including 18 but not limited to pursuing a fleeing criminal suspect, executing a duly 19 issued warrant, or conducting a school authorized activity. 20 SECTION 5. A NEW SECTION OF KRS CHAPTER 158 IS CREATED TO 21 READ AS FOLLOWS: 22 (1) For the purposes of this section, "controversial subject matter" means an issue 23 that is a point made in the electoral platform of a political party as defined in 24 KRS 118.015 and is conte sted by the electoral platform of another political party 25 at the local, state, or federal level. 26 (2) The General Assembly hereby finds and declares that: 27 UNOFFICIAL COPY 23 RS BR 1276 Page 15 of 27 XXXX 2/8/2023 10:53 AM Jacketed (a) The common school environment and interactions between teachers and 1 students in kindergarten throu gh grade twelve (12) are primarily intended 2 to facilitate the learning of approved curricula and development of approved 3 sets of skills; and 4 (b) The common school environment is not an appropriate place to engage in 5 teacher -led or teacher -promoted social or political advocacy with respect to 6 controversial subject matter. 7 (3) A parent has a right to have his or her child spend time at school primarily 8 learning approved curricula and developing approved sets of skills with no time 9 spent being indoctrinated i nto any partisan political position or being involved in 10 teacher -led or teacher -promoted social or political advocacy with respect to 11 controversial subject matter. 12 (4) In the school setting or while serving in the scope of duties of temporary, part - 13 time, or full -time employment at a school, a teacher, school employee, guest 14 lecturer, guest instructor, or outside presenter shall not: 15 (a) Discuss with or provide instructio n to any student in kindergarten through 16 grade eight (8) on the topics of sexual orientation, sexual preference, or 17 gender expression inconsistent with biological sex; 18 (b) Discuss with or provide instruction to any student in grades nine (9) 19 through twelve (12) the topics of sexual orientation, sexual preference, or 20 gender expression inconsistent with biological sex, unless required for 21 instruction of the school's approved curriculum for the course being taught; 22 (c) Discuss the person's own sexual orientati on, sexual preference, or gender 23 expression that is inconsistent with his or her biological sex with any 24 student; or 25 (d) Display slogans, emblems, phrases, or symbols within view of any student 26 on school property that are associated with any sexual orienta tion, sexual 27 UNOFFICIAL COPY 23 RS BR 1276 Page 16 of 27 XXXX 2/8/2023 10:53 AM Jacketed preference, or gender expression inconsistent with biological sex. 1 (5) In the school setting or while serving in the scope of duties of temporary, part - 2 time, or full -time employment at a school, a teacher, school employee, guest 3 lecturer, gues t instructor, or outside presenter shall: 4 (a) Not endorse, support, or oppose any candidate or nominee for public office 5 or any elected or appointed official of the local, state, or federal 6 government; 7 (b) Not endorse, support, or oppose any pending, propo sed, or enacted 8 legislation or regulation at the local, state, or federal level in the presence of 9 students; 10 (c) Not endorse, support, or oppose any pending, proposed, or decided court 11 case or judicial action at the local, state, or federal level in the pr esence of 12 students; 13 (d) Not endorse, support, or oppose any pending, proposed, or executed 14 executive action at the local, state, or federal level in the presence of 15 students; 16 (e) Only introduce or discuss with students a controversial subject matter if it is 17 germane to the curriculum and topic of the course being taught and shall 18 not advocate in a partisan manner for a specific side; 19 (f) Not display slogans, emblems, phrases, flags, or symbols that are associated 20 with any controversial subject matter, inclu ding the confederate flag, with 21 the exception of historical American, patriotic, war, or battle slogans, 22 emblems, phrases, flags, or symbols, even if they may have since acquired 23 secondary associations with controversial subject matter; 24 (g) Not segregate s tudents or form affinity groups of students according to any 25 protected class; 26 (h) Not engage in any activity meant to separate one (1) or more students based 27 UNOFFICIAL COPY 23 RS BR 1276 Page 17 of 27 XXXX 2/8/2023 10:53 AM Jacketed upon any immutable characteristic with the intent or effect of ascribing 1 disadvantage, advantage, inferiority, or superiority; 2 (i) Not assert that a person, simply by virtue of any immutable characteristic, is 3 inherently more valuable than others, or better qualified to understand, or 4 empathize with, persons with that characteristic; 5 (j) Not assert tha t possessing any set of immutable characteristics makes a 6 person in any way responsible for, or a contributor to, the suffering or 7 adverse conditions experienced by another student or group of people; and 8 (k) Not encourage or coerce, or attempt to encourag e or coerce, a child to 9 withhold any information about material or instruction presented to, or 10 conversation held with, the child from his or her parent. 11 (6) Notwithstanding the prohibitions on conduct in this section, a teacher, school 12 employee, guest lec turer, guest instructor, outside presenter, or student shall not 13 be compelled to endorse, affirm, support, oppose, or advocate for or against 14 anything in opposition to his or her sincerely held beliefs and convictions, 15 religious or otherwise, including but not limited to: 16 (a) Political candidates, parties, platforms, issues, judicial judgements, 17 legislation, regulation, executive order, or policies; 18 (b) Any position on controversial subject matter; 19 (c) Any position on a religious belief, dogma, doctrine, or practice; 20 (d) Any perspective on sexual orientation, sexual preference, or gender 21 expression; or 22 (e) The use of pronouns or other identifiers to refer to a person that are 23 inconsistent with the person's biological sex. 24 (7) In support of the rights outlin ed in this section, each local board of education or 25 charter school board of directors shall adopt policies and procedures to ensure 26 that: 27 UNOFFICIAL COPY 23 RS BR 1276 Page 18 of 27 XXXX 2/8/2023 10:53 AM Jacketed (a) No funds are expended for any professional development, trainings, or 1 incentives that instruct, advise, reward, o r compel any teacher, school 2 employee, or presenter to take a particular position on, or advocate for or 3 against, anything listed in subsection (5) or (6) of this section; 4 (b) No professional advantage, disadvantage, incentive, disincentive, 5 promotion, de motion, reward, or penalty of any type is conferred or 6 contingent upon a teacher, school employee, or presenter’s willingness, 7 refusal, or failure to take a particular position on, or advocate for or 8 against, anything listed in subsection (5) or (6) of thi s section; 9 (c) All teachers, school employees, guest lecturers, guest instructors, and 10 outside presenters at a school are aware of the prohibitions of this section 11 and the penalties for willful violation; and 12 (d) All teachers, school employees, guest lectu rers, guest instructors, and 13 outside presenters at a school comply with the prohibitions of this section 14 and that repeated willful violations are subject to dismissal. 15 (8) Nothing in this section shall prevent or limit: 16 (a) A school employee from conversationally referencing his or her own legal 17 spouse, without discussion of sexual conduct as defined in Section 6 of this 18 Act; 19 (b) The provision of one -on-one counseling or men tal health or health care 20 services by an appropriately licensed professional employed to serve in that 21 capacity; or 22 (c) The requirement to address in an impartial and factual way topics that are 23 permissible under statute and approved by standard school dis trict or public 24 charter school policies, and which satisfy all administrative regulations, 25 including but not limited to those established in the standards for the course 26 being taught. 27 UNOFFICIAL COPY 23 RS BR 1276 Page 19 of 27 XXXX 2/8/2023 10:53 AM Jacketed SECTION 6. A NEW SECTION OF KRS CHAP TER 158 IS CREATED TO 1 READ AS FOLLOWS: 2 (1) As used in this section: 3 (a) "Distribute" means to transfer possession of or provide access to other 4 persons for observation, as might occur with matter in a common library, 5 performance, or digital streaming servi ce, whether with or without 6 consideration; 7 (b) "Drag performance" means a performance in which a performer sings, lip 8 syncs, dances, reads, or otherwise performs before an audience for 9 entertainment while exhibiting a gender expression that is inconsistent with 10 the biological sex formally recognized on the performer's original birth 11 certificate using clothing, makeup, or other physical markers, and this 12 gender expression is a caricatured, advertised, or featured aspect of the 13 performance taken as a whole; 14 (c) "Harmful to minors" means that quality of any description, depiction, or 15 representation, in whatever form, of nudity, sexual conduct, sexual 16 excitement, or sadomasochistic abuse that: 17 1. Taken as a whole, appeals to the prurient interest of minors; 18 2. Is patently offensive to prevailing standards in the adult community as 19 a whole with respect to what is suitable for minors; and 20 3. Taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific 21 values for minors; 22 (d) "Matter" or "material" ha s the same meaning as matter in KRS 531.010; 23 (e) "Minor" has the same meaning as in KRS 500.080; 24 (f) "Nudity" or "nude" means the: 25 1. Showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, or 26 buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering; 27 UNOFFICIAL COPY 23 RS BR 1276 Page 20 of 27 XXXX 2/8/2023 10:53 AM Jacketed 2. Showing the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of 1 any portion below the top of the nipple; 2 3. Depiction of covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state; 3 (g) "Obscene" means; 4 1. To the average person, applying contemporary community standa rds, 5 the predominant appeal of the matter, taken as a whole, is a prurient 6 interest in nudity, sexual conduct, excretion, sexual stimulation, or 7 sexual gratification; 8 2. The matter depicts or describes the nudity, sexual conduct, excretion, 9 sexual stimulat ion, or sexual gratification in a patently offensive way; 10 and 11 3. The matter, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political, 12 or scientific value; 13 (h) "Obscene imagery representing minors" means a visual depiction of any 14 kind produced by any means, including but not limited to a drawing, 15 cartoon, sculpture, or painting, that: 16 1. a. Depicts a minor engaging in sexual conduct; and 17 b. Is obscene; or 18 2. a. Depicts an image that is or appears to be of a minor engaging in 19 graphic bestiality, sadomasochistic abuse, or sexual intercourse; 20 and 21 b. Lacks serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value; 22 (i) "Performance" means any physical human bodily ac tivity, including 23 singing, dancing, speaking, acting, simulating, or pantomiming or any play, 24 motion picture, exhibition, or presentation, whether picture, animated, live, 25 or recorded, that is intended for an audience of one (1) or more persons; 26 (j) "Pruri ent interest" means an erotic, lascivious, degrading, shameful, or 27 UNOFFICIAL COPY 23 RS BR 1276 Page 21 of 27 XXXX 2/8/2023 10:53 AM Jacketed morbid interest in defecation, urination, nudity, sexual conduct, sexual 1 stimulation, or sexual gratification; 2 (k) "Sadomasochistic abuse" means flagellation, torture, or physical restraint 3 by or upon a person for the purpose of sexual gratification of either person; 4 (l) "Serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value" or "serious literary, 5 artistic, political, or scientific value for minors" means that a performance's 6 or matter 's main contribution and importance, taken on the whole 7 exclusively in one (1) of the specific and limited literary, artistic, political, or 8 scientific areas is sufficient that a reasonable person would determine it 9 substantially outweighs the totality of the government's compelling interests 10 in limiting access to matter or performances that, if made widely available, 11 would among other harms: 12 1. Weaken public morality; 13 2. Promote disorder; 14 3. Exacerbate the public health crises related to pornography recog nized 15 by the General Assembly; 16 4. Promote or normalize sexual or sadomasochistic abuse; and 17 5. In the case of performances or matter that make indecency, 18 pornography, obscenity, or harmful to minors content accessible to 19 children, infringe upon parental rights to control the upbringing and 20 education, mental, emotional, and physical health care, and moral and 21 religious development of their children. 22 Winning any award, prize, or other institutional recognition that considers 23 any factor, including but not limited to demographic characteristics of the 24 author, the author's historical significance, or the matter's social impact, 25 other than the purely literary, artistic, political, or scientific value of the 26 performance or matter in question, shall not factor i nto the assessment of 27 UNOFFICIAL COPY 23 RS BR 1276 Page 22 of 27 XXXX 2/8/2023 10:53 AM Jacketed the matter for either adults or minors; 1 (m) "Sexual conduct" has the same meaning as in KRS 531.010 and shall 2 include: 3 1. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; 4 2. Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, or sodomy; 5 3. Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals or pubic region; 6 or 7 4. Fondling or other erotic touching of human buttocks or the female 8 breast; 9 (n) "Sexual excitement" means a condition of human male or female genitals 10 when in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal, or the sensual experiences 11 of humans engaging in or witnessing sexual conduct or nudity; 12 (o) "Sexual intercourse" has the same meaning as in KRS 510.010 and 13 includes "deviate sexual intercourse" as defined in KRS 510.010; a nd 14 (p) "Stripping" means any act which involves the intentional removal or 15 simulated removal of clothing in a sexual manner, or intentional nudity, for 16 the entertainment of one (1) or more individuals. 17 (2) A parent with the fundamental rights identified in Sections 2, 3, 4, and 5 of this 18 Act also has the right and reasonable expectation that his or her child will not be 19 exposed to or be given access to any pervasively vulgar or obscene matter or 20 performance harmful to minors, or any obscene imagery represen ting minors. 21 (3) To safeguard the rights identified in subsection (2) of this section, each local 22 board of education or charter school board of directors shall take necessary 23 actions and adopt policies and procedures to: 24 (a) Take reasonable precautions to make inaccessible, on any property owned, 25 leased, or operated by the public school, to any minor any pervasively 26 vulgar or obscene matter harmful to minors, obscene imagery representing 27 UNOFFICIAL COPY 23 RS BR 1276 Page 23 of 27 XXXX 2/8/2023 10:53 AM Jacketed minors, or any performance that is harmful for minors, pervasively vul gar, 1 or obscene; and 2 (b) Prohibit on the site of on any property owned, leased, or operated by the 3 public school, any performance that is harmful to minors, drag 4 performance, pervasively vulgar performance, obscene performance, or any 5 performance involving sexual conduct, nudity, or stripping. 6 (4) Willful violation of this section by an employee of a school shall be a basis for 7 disciplinary action. 8 (5) In addition to the actions authorized under subsection (4) of this section, willful 9 violation of this section may also be the basis for criminal prosecution under KRS 10 Chapter 531 or any other applicable statute. 11 (6) No obscene matter, obscene imagery repre senting minors, matter or performance 12 that is harmful to minors, obscene performance, drag performance, stripping, or 13 pervasively vulgar matter or performance shall be deemed to have educational 14 value for minors in the Commonwealth. 15 (7) This section shall not prohibit the use of approved instructional material used in 16 public schools, provided that parents of a child are given advance notice of matter 17 or materials that are potentially harmful to minors in the planned instruction, 18 and parents are given the op portunity to remove the child, without penalty, from 19 the instruction if the instructional material: 20 (a) Is permissible under state law; 21 (b) Is approved by standard school district or public charter school policies; 22 and 23 (c) Satisfies all administrative regu lations for academic standards for the 24 course being taught. 25 Section 7. KRS 158.148 is amended to read as follows: 26 (1) A parent that has the fundamental rights established under Sections 1 to 6 of this 27 UNOFFICIAL COPY 23 RS BR 1276 Page 24 of 27 XXXX 2/8/2023 10:53 AM Jacketed Act also has a righ t and reasonable expectation that his or her child will not be 1 bullied while at school, at school -sanctioned events, or on school -sponsored 2 transportation. To safeguard this right, a school board shall establish policies and 3 procedures in accordance with t his section to ensure that if a child is involved in 4 a bullying incident, the school will notify the parents of all circumstances 5 involved and take actions to provide support for the victim and to prevent further 6 bullying. 7 (2)[(1)] (a) As used in this sect ion, "bullying" means any unwanted verbal, physical, 8 or social behavior among students that involves a real or perceived power 9 imbalance and is repeated or has the potential to be repeated: 10 1. That occurs on school premises, on school -sponsored transporta tion, or 11 at a school -sponsored event; or 12 2. That disrupts the education process. 13 (b) This definition shall not be interpreted to prohibit civil exchange of opinions 14 or debate or cultural practices protected under the state or federal Constitution 15 where the opinion expressed does not otherwise materially or substantially 16 disrupt the education process. 17 (3)[(2)] In cooperation with the Kentucky Education Association, the Kentucky 18 School Boards Association, the Kentucky Association of School Administrators, 19 the Kentucky Association of Professional Educators, the Kentucky Association of 20 School Superintendents, the Parent -Teachers Association, the Kentucky Chamber 21 of Commerce, the Farm Bureau, members of the Interim Joint Committee on 22 Education, and other interest ed groups, and in collaboration with the Center for 23 School Safety, the Department of Education shall develop or update as needed and 24 distribute to all districts by August 31 of each even -numbered year, beginning 25 August 31, 2008: 26 (a) Statewide student disci pline guidelines to ensure safe schools, including the 27 UNOFFICIAL COPY 23 RS BR 1276 Page 25 of 27 XXXX 2/8/2023 10:53 AM Jacketed definition of serious incident for the reporting purposes as identified in KRS 1 158.444; 2 (b) Recommendations designed to improve the learning environment and school 3 climate, parental and community invol vement in the schools, and student 4 achievement; and 5 (c) A model policy to implement the provisions of this section and KRS 158.156, 6 158.444, 525.070, and 525.080. 7 (4)[(3)] The department shall obtain statewide data on major discipline problems and 8 reasons why students drop out of school. In addition, the department, in 9 collaboration with the Center for School Safety, shall identify successful strategies 10 currently being used in programs in Kentucky and in other states and shall 11 incorporate those strategies i nto the statewide guidelines and the recommendations 12 under subsection (3)[(2)] of this section. 13 (5)[(4)] Copies of the discipline guidelines shall be distributed to all school districts. 14 The statewide guidelines shall contain broad principles and legal requirements to 15 guide local districts in developing their own discipline code and school councils in 16 the sel ection of discipline and classroom management techniques under KRS 17 158.154; and in the development of the district -wide safety plan. 18 (6)[(5)] (a) Each local board of education shall be responsible for formulating a 19 code of acceptable behavior and disciplin e to apply to the students in each 20 school operated by the board. The code shall be updated no less frequently 21 than every two (2) years, with the first update being completed by November 22 30, 2008. 23 (b) The superintendent, or designee, shall be responsible fo r overall 24 implementation and supervision, and each school principal shall be 25 responsible for administration and implementation within each school. Each 26 school council shall select and implement the appropriate discipline and 27 UNOFFICIAL COPY 23 RS BR 1276 Page 26 of 27 XXXX 2/8/2023 10:53 AM Jacketed classroom management techniques necessary to carry out the code. The board 1 shall establish a process for a two -way communication system for teachers 2 and other employees to notify a principal, supervisor, or other administrator of 3 an existing emergency. 4 (c) The code shall prohibit bullyi ng. 5 (d) The code shall contain the type of behavior expected from each student, the 6 consequences of failure to obey the standards, and the importance of the 7 standards to the maintenance of a safe learning environment where orderly 8 learning is possible and encouraged. 9 (e) The code shall contain: 10 1. Procedures for identifying, documenting, and reporting incidents of 11 bullying, incidents of violations of the code, and incidents for which 12 reporting is required under KRS 158.156 , including but not limited to 13 the appropriate order of reporting to staff and escalation to staff if the 14 incidents persist ; 15 2. Procedures for investigating and responding to a complaint or a report of 16 bullying or a violation of the code, or of an incident for which reporting 17 is required un der KRS 158.156, including but not limited to specific 18 time requirements for beginning and completing an investigation; 19 3. Procedures for the appeal and review of each incident, including but 20 not limited to specific time requirements; 21 4. Procedures for [including] reporting incidents to the parents, legal 22 guardians, or other persons exercising custodial control or supervision o f 23 the students involved , including the actions to be taken to prevent any 24 possible future acts of bullying or retaliation ; 25 5. Procedures for providing support for the victim and assessing the need 26 for protection of the victim; 27 UNOFFICIAL COPY 23 RS BR 1276 Page 27 of 27 XXXX 2/8/2023 10:53 AM Jacketed 6.[3]. A strategy or method o f protecting from retaliation a complainant or 1 person reporting an incident of bullying, a violation of the code, or an 2 incident for which reporting is required under KRS 158.156; 3 7.[4.] A process for informing students, parents, legal guardians, or other 4 persons exercising custodial control or supervision, and school 5 employees of the requirements of the code and the provisions of this 6 section and KRS 158.156, 158.444, 525.070, and 525.080, including 7 training for school employees; and 8 8.[5.] Information reg arding the consequences of bullying and violating the 9 code and violations reportable under KRS 158.154, 158.156, or 158.444. 10 (f) The principal of each school shall apply the code of behavior and discipline 11 uniformly and fairly to each student at the school without partiality or 12 discrimination. 13 (g) A copy of the code of behavior and discipline adopted by the board of 14 education shall be posted at each school. Guidance counselors shall be 15 provided copies for discussion with students. The code shall be referenc ed in 16 all school handbooks. All school employees and parents, legal guardians, or 17 other persons exercising custodial control or supervision shall be provided 18 copies of the code. 19 Section 8. Sections 1 to 6 and 7 of this A ct shall be known as the Childhood 20 Protection in Education Act. 21 23 LC 33 9320 S. B. 141 - 1 -Senate Bill 141 By: Senators Dixon of the 45th, Gooch of the 51s t, Harbin of the 16th, Robertson of the 29th, Still of the 48th and others A BILL TO BE ENTITLED AN ACT To amend Chapter 1 of Title 43 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, relating to1 general provisions relative to professions and businesses, so as to prohibit health care2 providers from performing specified practices on minors relating to altering a person's3 appearance relating to gender; to prohibit health care providers from aiding or abetting such4 practices for minors; to provide for definitions; to provide for exceptions; to provide for5 enforcement; to amend Part 3 of Article 16 of Chapter 2 of Title 20 of the Official Code of 6 Georgia Annotated, relating to student health, so as to prohibit school nurses and other7 employees and officials from engaging in certain conduct relating to a minor's perception of8 his or her gender; to provide for legislative fi ndings; to provide for related matters; to provide 9 for an effective date; to repeal conflicting laws; and for other purposes.10 BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF GEORGIA: 11 SECTION 1. 12 The General Assembly finds and declares that:13 (1) This state has a compelling government interest in protecting the health and safety of 14 its citizens, especially vulnerable children; 1523 LC 33 9320 S. B. 141 - 2 -(2) Only a tiny percentage of the American population experiences distress at identifying 16 with their biological sex. According to the American Psychiatric Association, prevalence 17 ranges from 0.005 to 0.014 percent for natal adult males and from 0.002 to 0.003 percent 18 for natal females; 19 (3) Studies consistently demonstrate that the vast majority of children who are gender 20 nonconforming or experience distress at identifying with their biological sex come to 21 identify with their biological sex in adolescence or adulthood, thereby rendering most 22 medical health care interventions unnecessary; 23 (4) Scientific studies show that individuals struggling with distress at identifying with their 24 biological sex of ten have already experienced psychopathology, which indicates these 25 individuals should be encouraged to seek me ntal health care services before undertaking 26 any hormonal or surgical intervention; 27 (5) Suicide rates, psychiatric morbidities, and mortality rates remain markedly elevated 28 above the background population after inpatient gender reassignment procedures have been 29 performed; 30 (6) Some health care providers are prescribing puberty-blocking drugs in order to delay 31 the onset or progression of normally timed puberty in children who experience distress at 32 identifying with their biological sex. This is being done despite the lack of any long-term 33 longitudinal studies evaluating the risks and benefits of using these drugs for the treatment 34 of such distress or gender transition; 35 (7) Health care providers are also prescribing cross-sex hormones for children who 36 experience distress at identifying with their biological sex, despite the fact that no 37 randomized clinical trials have been conducted on the efficacy or safety of the use of 38 cross-sex hormones in adults or children for the purpose of treating such distress or gender 39 transition; 40 (8) The use of cross-sex hormones comes with the following serious known risks: 4123 LC 33 9320 S. B. 141 - 3 -(A) For biological females, erythrocytosis, severe liver dysfunction, coronary artery 42 disease, cerebrovascular disease, hypertension, increased risk of breast and uterine 43 cancers, and irreversible infertility; and 44 (B) For biological males, thromboembolic disease, cholelithiasis, coronary artery 45 disease, macroprolactinoma, cerebrovascular disease, hypertriglyceridemia, breast cancer, 46 and irreversible infertility; 47 (9) Genital and non-genital reassignment surgeries are generally not recommended for 48 children, although evidence indicates referrals for children to have such surgeries are 49 becoming more frequent; 50 (10) Genital gender reassignment surgery incl udes several irreversible invasive procedures 51 for males and females and involves the following alterations of biologically normal and 52 functional body parts: 53 (A) For biological males, surgery may involve genital reconstruction including 54 penectomy, orchiectomy, vaginoplasty, clitoroplasty, and vulvoplasty; and 55 (B) For biological females, surgery may involve a hysterectomy or oophorectomy, 56 reconstruction of the urethra, genital reconstruction including metoidioplasty or 57 phalloplasty, vaginectomy, scrotoplasty, and implantation of erection or testicular 58 prostheses; 59 (11) The complications, risks, and long-term care concerns associated with genital gender 60 reassignment surgery for both males and females are numerous and complex; 61 (12) Non-genital gender reassignment surgery includes various invasive procedures for 62 males and females and also involves the alte ration or removal of biologically normal and 63 functional body parts: 64 (A) For biological males, procedures may include augmentation mammoplasty, facial 65 feminization surgery, liposuction, lipofilling, voice surgery, thyroid cartilage reduction, 66 gluteal augmentation, hair reconstruction, and other aesthetic procedures; and 6723 LC 33 9320 S. B. 141 - 4 -(B) For biological females, procedures may include subcutaneous mastectomy, voice 68 surgery, liposuction, lipofilling, pectoral implants, and other aesthetic procedures; 69 (13) It is an accepted principle of economics and public policy that when a service or 70 product is subsidized or paid for, demand for that service or product increases. Just 71 between 2015 and 2016, gender reassignment surgeries increased by 20 percent; 72 (14) It is of grave concern that the medical community is allowing individuals who 73 experience distress at identifying with their biological sex to be subjects of irreversible and 74 drastic non-genital gender reassignment surgery and irreversible, permanently sterilizing 75 genital gender reassignment surgery, despite the lack of studies showing that the benefits 76 of such extreme interventions outweigh the risks; and 77 (15) The risks of gender transition procedures far outweigh any benefit at this stage of 78 clinical study on these procedures. 79 SECTION 2. 80 Chapter 1 of Title 43 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, relating to general81 provisions relative to professions and businesse s, is amending by adding a new Code section 82 to read as follows:83 "43-1-36. 84 (a) As used in this Code section, the term: 85 (1) 'Health care provider' means any person licensed under Chapter 9, 10A, 11, 11A, 26, 86 28, 30, 33, 34, 35, 39, or 44 of Title 43 or any hospital, nursing home, home health 87 agency, institution, or medical facility licensed or defined under Chapter 7 of Title 31. 88 Such term shall also include any corporation, professional corporation, partnership, 89 limited liability company, limited liability partnership, authority, or other entity 90 composed of such health care providers. 91 (2) 'Sex' means the biological indication of male and female, including sex 92 chromosomes, naturally occurring sex horm ones, gonads, and nonambiguous internal and 9323 LC 33 9320 S. B. 141 - 5 -external genitalia present at birth, without re gard to an individual' s psychological, chosen, 94 or subjective experience of gender. 95 (b) Except as otherwise provided in subsecti on (d) of this Code section, no health care 96 provider in this state shall knowingly engage in or cause any of the following practices to 97 be performed upon any minor if the practice is performed for the purpose of attempting to 98 alter the appearance of or affirm the minor's perception of his or her gender or sex, if that 99 appearance or perception is inconsistent with the minor's sex: 100 (1) Prescribing or administering gonadotropin-releasing hormone analogues or other 101 synthetic drugs used to stop luteinizing hormone and follicle-stimulating hormone 102 secretion, synthetic antiandrogen drugs used to block the androgen receptor, or any drug 103 to suppress or delay normal puberty; 104 (2) Prescribing or administering testosterone, estrogen, or progesterone to a minor in an 105 amount greater than would normally be produced endogenously in a healthy individual 106 of that individual's age and sex; 107 (3) Performing surgeries that sterilize, including castration, vasectomy, hysterectomy, 108 oophorectomy, orchiectomy, and penectomy; 109 (4) Performing surgeries that artificially construct tissue with the appearance of genitalia 110 that differs from the individual's sex, including metoidioplasty, phalloplasty, and 111 vaginoplasty; or 112 (5) Removing any healthy or nondiseased body part or tissue. 113 (c) No health care provider shall knowingly engage in conduct that aids or abets the 114 practices described in subsection (b) of this Code section on any minor. 115 (d) Subsections (b) and (c) of this Code section shall not apply to: 116 (1) Services provided to individuals born with a medically verifiable disorder of sex 117 development, including a person with external biological sex characteristics that are 118 irresolvably ambiguous, such as an individual born with 46 XX chromosomes with 11923 LC 33 9320 S. B. 141 - 6 -virilization, 46 XY chromosomes with undervirilization, or having both ovarian and 120 testicular tissue; 121 (2) Services provided to an individual when a physician has otherwise diagnosed a 122 disorder of sexual development, in which the physician has determined through genetic 123 or biochemical testing that the individual does not have normal sex chromosome 124 structure, sex steroid hormone production, or sex steroid hormone action for a biological 125 male or biological female; 126 (3) The treatment of any infection, injury, disease, or disorder that has been caused or 127 exacerbated by the performance of a procedure described in subsection (b) of this Code 128 section, whether or not the procedures were performed in accordance with state and 129 federal law; or 130 (4) Any procedure undertaken because an individual suffers from a physical disorder, 131 physical injury, or physical illness that is certified by a physician and that would place 132 the individual in imminent danger of death or impairment of major bodily function unless 133 surgery is performed. 134 (e)(1) The provision of services to or engaging in conduct regarding any minor described 135 in subsections (b) and (c) of this Code section shall be considered unprofessional conduct 136 and shall be subject to discipline by the licensing entity with jurisdiction over the health 137 care provider. 138 (2) A person may assert an actual or threatened violation of this Code section as a claim 139 or defense in a judicial or administrative proceeding and obtain compensatory damages, 140 injunctive relief, declaratory relief, or any other appropriate relief. 141 (3) A person shall be required to bring a cl aim for a violation of this Code section not 142 later than two years after the day the cause of action accrues. A minor may bring an 143 action before reaching 18 years of age thr ough a parent or guar dian, and may bring an 144 action in the minor's own name upon reaching 18 years of age at any time from that point 145 until he or she reaches 38 years of age. 14623 LC 33 9320 S. B. 141 - 7 -(4) An action under this Code section may be commenced, and relief may be granted, in 147 a judicial proceeding without regard to whether the person commencing the action has 148 sought or exhausted available administrative remedies. 149 (5) In any action or proceeding to enforce a provision of this Code section, a prevailing 150 party who establishes a violation of this Code section shall be entitled to recover 151 reasonable attorney's fees. 152 (6) The Attorney General may bring an action to enforce compliance with this Code 153 section. Nothing in this Code section shall be construed to deny, impair, or otherwise 154 affect any right or authority of the Attorney General, the state, or any agency, officer, or 155 employee of the state to institute or intervene in any proceeding. 156 (f) Nothing in this Code section shall be construed to impose liability on any speech or 157 conduct protected by federal or state law. " 158 SECTION 3. 159 Part 3 of Article 16 of Chapter 2 of Title 20 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, 160 relating to student health, is amended by adding a new Code section to read as follows: 161 "20-2-779.3. 162 (a) As used in this Code section, the term 'sex' means the biological indication of male and 163 female, including sex chromosomes, naturally occurring sex hormones, gonads, and 164 nonambiguous internal and external genitalia present at birth, without regard to an 165 individual's psychological, chosen, or subjective experience of gender. 166 (b) No school nurse, counselor, teacher, principal, or other official or staff at a public or 167 private school shall knowingly: 168 (1) Encourage or coerce a minor to withhold from the minor's parent or legal guardian 169 the fact that the minor's perception of his or her gender is inconsistent with his or her sex; 170 or 17123 LC 33 9320 S. B. 141 - 8 -(2) Withhold from a minor's parent or legal guardian information related to the minor's 172 perception that his or her gender is inconsistent with his or her sex. " 173 SECTION 4. 174 This Act shall become effective on January 1, 2024. 175 SECTION 5. 176 All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are repealed. 177 WEST VIRGINIA LEGISLATURE2023 REGULAR SESSIONIntroducedSenate Bill 692By Senators Maynard and Taylor[Introduced February 20, 2023; referredto the Committee on Health and Human Resources; and then to the Committee on the Judiciary]A BILL to amend the Code of West Virginia, as amended, by adding thereto a new article, designated §16-66-1, §16-66-2, §16-66-3, §16-66-4, and §16-66-5, all relating to gender reassignment medical services for minors; making findings and declarations; defining sex; establishing prohibited treatment for minors; providing exceptions; creating responsibilities for school personnel; and establishing consequences for violations of article.Be it enacted by the Legislature of West Virginia: Article 66. Gender reassignment medical services for minors. §16-66-1. Findings and Declarations. The West Virginia Legislature hereby finds and declares all of the following:(1) This state has a compelling government interest in protecting the health and safety of its citizens, especially vulnerable children;(2) Only a tiny percentage of the American population experiences distress at identifying with their biological sex. According to the American psychiatric association, prevalence ranges from 0.005 to 0.014 percent for natal adult males and from 0.002 to 0.003 percent for natal females;(3) Studies consistently demonstrate that the vast majority of children who are gender non-conforming or experience distress at identifying with their biological sex come to identify with their biological sex in adolescence or adulthood, thereby rendering most medical health care interventions unnecessary;(4) Scientific studies show that individuals struggling with distress at identifying with their biological sex often have already experienced psychopathology, which indicates these individuals should be encouraged to seek mental health care services before undertaking any hormonal or surgical intervention;(5) Suicide rates, psychiatric morbidities, and mortality rates remain markedly elevated above the background population after inpatient gender reassignment procedures have been performed;(6) Some health care providers are prescribing puberty-blocking drugs in order to delay the onset or progression of normally-timed puberty in children who experience distress at identifying with their biological sex. This is being done despite the lack of any long-term longitudinal studies evaluating the risks and benefits of using these drugs for the treatment of such distress or gender transition;(7) Health care providers are also prescribing cross-sex hormones for children who experience distress at identifying with their biological sex, despite the fact that no randomized clinical trials have been conducted on the efficacy or safety of the use of cross-sex hormones in adults or children for the purpose of treating such distress or gender transition;(8) The use of cross-sex hormones comes with the following serious known risks:(A) For biological females, erythrocytosis, severe liver dysfunction, coronary artery disease, cerebrovascular disease, hypertension, increased risk of breast and uterine cancers, and irreversible infertility.(B) For biological males, thromboembolic disease, cholelithiasis, coronary artery disease, macroprolactinoma, cerebrovascular disease, hypertriglyceridemia, breast cancer, and irreversible infertility.(9) Genital and non-genital reassignment surgeries are generally not recommended for children, although evidence indicates referrals for children to have such surgeries are becoming more frequent;(10) Genital gender reassignment surgery includes several irreversible invasive procedures for males and females and involves the following alterations of biologically normal and functional body parts:(A) For biological males, surgery may involve genital reconstruction including penectomy, orchiectomy, vaginoplasty, clitoroplasty, and vulvoplasty.(B) For biological females, surgery may involve a hysterectomy or oophorectomy, reconstruction of the urethra, genital reconstruction including metoidioplasty or phalloplasty, vaginectomy, scrotoplasty, and implantation of erection or testicular prostheses.(11) The complications, risks, and long-term care concerns associated with genital gender reassignment surgery for both males and females are numerous and complex;(12) Non-genital gender reassignment surgery includes various invasive procedures for males and females and also involves the alteration or removal of biologically normal and functional body parts:(A) For biological males, procedures may include augmentation mammoplasty, facial feminization surgery, liposuction, lipofilling, voice surgery, thyroid cartilage reduction, gluteal augmentation, hair reconstruction, and other aesthetic procedures.(B) For biological females, procedures may include subcutaneous mastectomy, voice surgery, liposuction, lipofilling, pectoral implants, and other aesthetic procedures.(13) It is an accepted principle of economics and public policy that when a service or product is subsidized or paid for, demand for that service or product increases. Just between 2015 and 2016, gender reassignment surgeries increased by 20 percent;(14) It is of grave concern to the Legislature that the medical community is allowing individuals who experience distress at identifying with their biological sex to be subjects of irreversible and drastic non-genital gender reassignment surgery and irreversible, permanently sterilizing genital gender reassignment surgery, despite the lack of studies showing that the benefits of such extreme interventions outweigh the risks;(15) The risks of gender transition procedures far outweigh any benefit at this stage of clinical study on these procedures. §16-66-2. Definition of Sex. As used in this article, "sex" means the biological indication of male and female, including sex chromosomes, naturally occurring sex hormones, gonads, and nonambiguous internal and external genitalia present at birth, without regard to an individual's psychological, chosen, or subjective experience of gender. §16-66-3. Prohibited practices. (a) Except as provided in subsection (c) of this section, no physician or other medical health care professional shall knowingly engage in or cause any of the following practices to be performed upon any person under the age of 18 if the practice is performed for the purpose of attempting to alter the appearance of or affirm the minor's perception of his or her gender or sex, if that appearance or perception is inconsistent with the minor's sex as defined in this act:(1) Prescribing or administering puberty blocking medication to stop or delay normal puberty.(2) Prescribing or administering supraphysiologic doses of testosterone or other androgens to females.(3) Prescribing or administering supraphysiologic doses of estrogen to males.(4) Performing surgeries that sterilize, including castration, vasectomy, hysterectomy, oophorectomy, orchiectomy, and penectomy.(5) Performing surgeries that artificially construct tissue with the appearance of genitalia that differs from the individual's sex, including metoidioplasty, phalloplasty, and vaginoplasty.(6) Removing any healthy or non-diseased body part or tissue, except for a male circumcision.(b) No physician, mental health provider, or other medical health care professional shall knowingly engage in conduct that aids or abets the practices described in subsection (a) to any person under 18 years of age. This section may not be construed to impose liability on any speech or conduct protected by federal or state law.(c) Subsections (a) and (b) do not apply to:(1) Services provided to individuals born with a medically verifiable disorder of sex development, including a person with external biological sex characteristics that are irresolvably ambiguous, such as an individual born with 46 XX chromosomes with virilization, 46 XY chromosomes with undervirilization, or having both ovarian and testicular tissue;(2) Services provided to an individual when a physician has otherwise diagnosed a disorder of sexual development, in which the physician has determined through genetic or biochemical testing that the individual does not have normal sex chromosome structure, sex steroid hormone production, or sex steroid hormone action for a biological male or biological female;(3) The treatment of any infection, injury, disease, or disorder that has been caused or exacerbated by the performance of gender transition procedures, whether or not the procedures were performed in accordance with state and federal law;(4) Any procedure undertaken because an individual suffers from a physical disorder, physical injury, or physical illness that is certified by a physician and that would place the individual in imminent danger of death or impairment of major bodily function unless surgery is performed. §16-66-4. Responsibilities of school personnel. No nurse, counselor, teacher, principal, or other official or staff at a public or private school shall knowingly do either of the following:(1) Encourage or coerce a minor to withhold from the minor's parent or legal guardian the fact that the minor's perception of his or her gender is inconsistent with his or her sex;(2) Withhold from a minor's parent or legal guardian information related to the minor's perception that his or her gender is inconsistent with his or her sex. §16-66-5. Violations of article. (a) The provision of services described in §16-66-3 of this code to any person under 18 years of age shall be considered unprofessional conduct and shall be subject to discipline by the licensing entity with jurisdiction over the physician, mental health provider, or other medical health care professional.(b) A person may assert an actual or threatened violation of this article as a claim or defense in a judicial or administrative proceeding and obtain compensatory damages, injunctive relief, declaratory relief, or any other appropriate relief.(c) A person shall be required to bring a claim for a violation of this article not later than two years after the day the cause of action accrues. A minor may bring an action before reaching 18 years of age through a parent or guardian, and may bring an action in the minor's own name upon reaching 18 years of age at any time from that point until 20 years after.(d) An action under this article may be commenced, and relief may be granted, in a judicial proceeding without regard to whether the person commencing the action has sought or exhausted available administrative remedies.(e) In any action or proceeding to enforce a provision of this article, a prevailing party who establishes a violation of this chapter shall be entitled to recover reasonable attorneys' fees.(f) The attorney general may bring an action to enforce compliance with this article. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to deny, impair, or otherwise affect any right or authority of the attorney general, the state, or any agency, officer, or employee of the state to institute or intervene in any proceeding. NOTE: The purpose of this bill is relating to gender reassignment medical services for minors; making findings and declarations; defining sex; establishing prohibited treatment for minors; providing exceptions; creating responsibilities for school personnel; and establishing consequences for violations of articleStrike-throughs indicate language that would be stricken from a heading or the present law and underscoring indicates new language that would be added.