


MISSISSIPPI LEGISLATURE
2023 Regular Session
To: Public Health and Human Services
By: Representative Lamar
House Bill 1126
AN ACT TO RESTRICT TRANSGENDER MEDICAL PROCEDURES FOR ANY PERSON
UNDER TWENTY-ONE YEARS OF AGE; TO PROVIDE DEFINITIONS FOR THE ACT; TO PROHIBIT THE
ADMINISTRATION OF OR THE ASSISTANCE IN THE ADMINISTRATION OF CROSS SEX HORMONES
OR PUBERTY BLOCKING DRUGS; TO PROHIBIT THE PERFORMANCE OF GENDER REASSIGNMENT SURGERY;
TO PROHIBIT PHYSICIANS AND OTHER HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONALS FROM PROVIDING
GENDER TRANSITION PROCEDURES OR GENDER REASSIGNMENT SURGERY TO ANY PERSON UNDER
TWENTY-ONE YEARS OF AGE; TO PROHIBIT PHYSICIANS AND OTHER HEALTH CARE
PROFESSIONALS FROM REFERRING ANY PERSON UNDER A CERTAIN AGE TO ANY HEALTH CARE
PROFESSIONAL FOR GENDER TRANSITION OR GENDER REASSIGNMENT PROCEDURES; TO PROHIBIT
PARENTS, GUARDIANS OR PERSONS RESPONSIBLE FOR THE CARE OF A PERSON UNDER A CERTAIN
AGE FROM CONSENTING TO OR PROVIDING PUBERTY-BLOCKING DRUGS, CROSS SEX HORMONES;
TO PROVIDE CERTAIN EXCEPTIONS TO THOSE PROHIBITIONS; TO AMEND SECTION 97-5-39,
MISSISSIPPI CODE OF 1972, TO INCLUDE VIOLATIONS OF THIS ACT IN THE PENALTIES FOR
CHILD ABUSE; TO AMEND SECTION 43-21-105, MISSISSIPPI CODE OF 1972, TO REVISE THE
DEFINITION OF CHILD ABUSE TO INCLUDE VIOLATION OF THIS ACT; TO AMEND SECTION 97-5-51,
MISSISSIPPI CODE OF 1972, TO REQUIRE MANDATORY REPORTING OF PERSONS WHO VIOLATE
THE PROVISIONS OF THIS ACT; TO PROHIBIT THE DIRECT OR INDIRECT USE, GRANT,
PAYMENT OR DISTRIBUTION OF PUBLIC FUNDS TO ANY ENTITY, ORGANIZATION OR
INDIVIDUAL THAT PROVIDES GENDER TRANSITION PROCEDURES TO A PERSON UNDER TWENTY-ONE
YEARS OF AGE; TO PROVIDE THAT HEALTH CARE SERVICES FURNISHED IN A STATE OR
LOCALLY-OWNED HEALTH CARE FACILITY OR BY A PHYSICIAN OR OTHER HEALTH CARE
PROFESSIONAL EMPLOYED BY THE STATE OR LOCAL GOVERNMENT SHALL NOT INCLUDE GENDER
TRANSITION PROCEDURES FOR A PERSON UNDER TWENTY-ONE YEARS OF AGE; TO PROVIDE
THAT AMOUNTS PAID DURING A TAXABLE YEAR FOR PROVISION OF GENDER TRANSITION
PROCEDURES OR AS PREMIUMS FOR HEALTH CARE COVERAGE THAT INCLUDES COVERAGE FOR
GENDER TRANSITION PROCEDURES ARE NOT DEDUCTIBLE UNDER THE STATE INCOME TAX
LAWS; TO PROVIDE THAT ANY REFERRAL FOR OR PROVISION OF GENDER TRANSITION PROCEDURES
TO A PERSON UNDER TWENTY-ONE YEARS OF AGE BY A PHYSICIAN OR OTHER HEALTH CARE
PROFESSIONAL IS UNPROFESSIONAL CONDUCT AND IS SUBJECT TO DISCIPLINE BY THE APPROPRIATE
LICENSING ENTITY FOR THE HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONAL; TO AUTHORIZE THE ATTORNEY
GENERAL TO BRING AN ACTION TO ENFORCE COMPLIANCE WITH THIS ACT; TO CREATE NEW
SECTION 43-13-117.7, MISSISSIPPI CODE OF 1972, TO PROHIBIT THE DIVISION OF
MEDICAID FROM REIMBURSING OR PROVIDING COVERAGE FOR GENDER TRANSITION
PROCEDURES FOR A PERSON UNDER TWENTY-ONE YEARS OF AGE; TO AMEND SECTION 83-9-22,
MISSISSIPPI CODE OF 1972, TO PROVIDE THAT HEALTH COVERAGE PLANS ARE NOT REQUIRED
TO INCLUDE GENDER TRANSITION PROCEDURES; TO CREATE NEW SECTION 83-9-37,
MISSISSIPPI CODE OF 1972, TO PROVIDE THAT A HEALTH BENEFIT PLAN UNDER AN
INSURANCE POLICY OR OTHER PLAN PROVIDING HEALTH CARE COVERAGE SHALL NOT INCLUDE
REIMBURSEMENT FOR GENDER TRANSITION PROCEDURES FOR A PERSON UNDER TWENTY-ONE
YEARS OF AGE; TO AMEND SECTIONS 27-7-17, 73-15-29 AND 73-25-29, MISSISSIPPI
CODE OF 1972, TO CONFORM TO THE PROVISIONS OF THIS ACT; TO AMEND SECTION 11-46-5,
MISSISSIPPI CODE OF 1972, TO EXCLUDE FROM TORT IMMUNITY VIOLATIONS OF THIS ACT;
TO AMEND SECTION 11-1-60, MISSISSIPPI CODE OF 1972, TO EXCLUDE VIOLATION OF THIS
ACT FROM LIMITS ON NONECONOMIC DAMAGES; AND FOR RELATED PURPOSES.
     BE IT ENACTED BY THE
LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF MISSISSIPPI:
     SECTION 1.  For
purposes of this act, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed
herein:
          (a)  "Biological
sex" means the biological indication of male and female in the context of
reproductive potential or capacity, such as sex chromosomes, naturally
occurring sex hormones, gonads, and nonambiguous internal and external
genitalia present at birth, without regard to an individual's psychological,
chosen, or subjective experience of gender;
          (b)  "Cross-sex
hormones" means:
               (i)  Testosterone
or other androgens given to biological females in amounts that are larger or
more potent than would normally occur naturally in healthy biological sex
females; and
               (ii)  Estrogen
given to biological males in amounts that are larger or more potent than would
normally occur naturally in healthy biological sex males;
          (c)  "Gender"
means the psychological, behavioral, social, and cultural aspects of being male
or female;
          (d)  "Gender
reassignment surgery" means any medical or surgical service that seeks to surgically
alter or remove healthy physical or anatomical characteristics or features that
are typical for the individual's biological sex, in order to instill or create
physiological or anatomical characteristics that resemble a sex different from
the individual's biological sex, including, without limitation, genital or
nongenital gender reassignment surgery performed for the purpose of assisting
an individual with a gender transition including, without limitation:
               (i)  Surgical
procedures such as penectomy, orchiectomy, vaginoplasty, clitoroplasty, or
vulvoplasty for biologically male patients or hysterectomy or ovariectomy for
biologically female patients;
               (ii)  Reconstruction
of the fixed part of the urethra with or without a metoidioplasty; 
               (iii)  Phalloplasty,
vaginectomy, scrotoplasty, or implantation of erection or testicular prostheses
for biologically female patients;
               (iv)  Surgical
procedures for biologically male patients, such as augmentation mammoplasty, facial
feminization surgery, liposuction, lipofilling, voice surgery, thyroid
cartilage reduction, gluteal augmentation, hair reconstruction, or various
aesthetic procedures; or
               (v)  Surgical procedures
for biologically female patients, such as subcutaneous mastectomy, voice
surgery, liposuction, lipofilling, pectoral implants, or various aesthetic
procedures;
          (e)  "Gender
transition" means the process in which a person goes from identifying with
and living as a gender that corresponds to his or her biological sex to
identifying with and living as a gender different from his or her biological
sex, and may involve social, legal, or physical changes;
          (f)  (i)  "Gender
transition procedures" means any medical or surgical service, including,
without limitation, physician's services, inpatient and outpatient hospital
services, or prescribed drugs related to gender transition that seek to:
                    1.  Alter or remove
physical or anatomical characteristics or features that are typical for the
individual's biological sex; or
                    2.  Instill
or create physiological or anatomical characteristics that resemble a sex
different from the individual's biological sex, including, without limitation,
medical services that provide puberty-blocking drugs, cross-sex hormones, or
other mechanisms to promote the development of feminizing or masculinizing
features in the opposite biological sex, or genital or nongenital gender reassignment
surgery performed for the purpose of assisting an individual with a gender
transition.
               (ii)  "Gender
transition procedures" do not include:
                    1.  Services
to persons born with a medically verifiable disorder of sex development,
including a person with external biological sex characteristics that are irresolvably
ambiguous, such as those born with forty-six (46) XX chromosomes with
virilization, forty-six (46) XY chromosomes with undervirilization, or having
both ovarian and testicular tissue;
                    2.  Services
provided when a physician has otherwise diagnosed a disorder of sexual
development that the physician has determined through genetic or biochemical
testing that the person does not have normal sex chromosome structure, sex
steroid hormone production, or sex steroid hormone action;
                    3.  The
treatment of any infection, injury, disease, or disorder that has been caused
by or exacerbated by the performance of gender transition procedures, whether
or not the gender transition procedure was performed in accordance with state
and federal law or whether or not the funding for the gender transition
procedure is permissible under this act; or
                    4.  Any
procedure undertaken because the individual suffers from a physical disorder,
physical injury, or physical illness that would, as certified by a physician,
place the individual in imminent danger of death or impairment of major bodily
function unless surgery is performed;
          (g)  "Health care
professional" means a person who is licensed, certified, or otherwise
authorized by the laws of this state to administer health care in the ordinary
course of the practice of his or her profession;
          (h)  "Physician"
means a person who is licensed to practice medicine in this state;
          (i)  "Puberty-blocking
drugs" means gonadotropin-releasing hormone analogues or other synthetic
drugs used in biological males to stop luteinizing hormone secretion and
therefore testosterone secretion, or synthetic drugs used in biological females
which stop the production of estrogens and progesterone, when used to delay or suppress
pubertal development in children for the purpose of assisting an individual
with a gender transition; and
          (j)  "Public funds"
means state, county, or local government monies, in addition to any department,
agency, or instrumentality authorized or appropriated under state law or
derived from any fund in which such monies are deposited.
     SECTION 2.  (1)
 (a)  No person may administer, supply, consent to, or assist in administering or
supplying a puberty-blocking drug or cross-sex hormone to a person under the age
of twenty-one (21) years of age.  
          (b)  No person shall perform
or provide, or assist in the performance or provision of gender transition procedures
or gender reassignment surgery to a person under the age of twenty-one (21) years
of age. 
          (c)  A physician or
other health care professional shall not provide gender transition procedures
to any person under twenty-one (21) years of age.
          (d)  A physician, or
other health care professional shall not refer any person under twenty-one (21)
years of age to any health care professional for gender transition procedures.
          (e)  Any person who violates
the prohibitions described in this section shall be guilty of the felony crime of
"gender disfigurement" and upon conviction, fined no less than Ten Thousand
Dollars ($10,000.00), sentenced up to five (5) years in the custody of the Department
of Corrections, or both. 
     (2)  A physician who violates
the prohibition in subsection (1) of this section shall have his or her license
to practice medicine in the State of Mississippi revoked pursuant to action taken
by the Mississippi State Board of Medical Licensure.
     (3)  For any claim accruing on
or after July 1, 2023, a private cause of action may be brought against a physician,
osteopath or hospital for injuries arising out of the course of medical, surgical
or other professional services related to the performance of gender reassignment
surgery or services.  
     (4)  For any claim accruing on
or after July 1, 2023, no claim as provided for in subsection (2) of this section
may be brought unless it is filed within five (5) years from the date the alleged
act occurred.
     (5)  If at the time at which
the cause of action arose, the person to whom such claim has accrued shall be twenty-one
(21) years of age or younger, then such minor or the person claiming through
such minor may, notwithstanding that the period of time limited pursuant to
subsection (3) of this section shall have expired, commence action on such
claim at any time within two (2) years next after the time at which the minor shall
have reached his or her twenty-first birthday, or shall have died, whichever
shall have first occurred.
     SECTION 3.  Section
97-5-39, Mississippi Code of 1972, is amended as follows:
     97-5-39.  (1)  (a)  Except
as otherwise provided in this section, any parent, guardian or other person who
intentionally, knowingly or recklessly commits any act or omits the performance
of any duty, which act or omission contributes to or tends to contribute to the
neglect or delinquency of any child or which act or omission results in the
abuse of any child, as defined in Section 43-21-105(m) of the Youth Court Law,
or who knowingly aids any child in escaping or absenting himself from the
guardianship or custody of any person, agency or institution, or knowingly harbors
or conceals, or aids in harboring or concealing, any child who has absented
himself without permission from the guardianship or custody of any person,
agency or institution to which the child shall have been committed by the youth
court shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be punished
by a fine not to exceed One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00), or by imprisonment
not to exceed one (1) year in jail, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
          (b)  For the purpose of
this section, a child is a person who has not reached his eighteenth birthday. 
A child who has not reached his eighteenth birthday and is on active duty for a
branch of the armed services, or who is married, is not considered a child for
the purposes of this statute.
          (c)  If a child commits
one (1) of the proscribed acts in subsection (2)(a), (b) or (c) of this section
upon another child, then original jurisdiction of all such offenses shall be in
youth court.
          (d)  If the child's
deprivation of necessary clothing, shelter, health care or supervision
appropriate to the child's age results in substantial harm to the child's
physical, mental or emotional health, the person may be sentenced to
imprisonment in custody of the Department of Corrections for not more than five
(5) years or to payment of a fine of not more than Five Thousand Dollars
($5,000.00), or both.
          (e)  A parent, legal
guardian or other person who knowingly permits the continuing physical or sexual
abuse of a child is guilty of neglect of a child and may be sentenced to
imprisonment in the custody of the Department of Corrections for not more than
ten (10) years or to payment of a fine of not more than Ten Thousand Dollars
($10,000.00), or both.
     (2)  Any person shall be
guilty of felonious child abuse in the following circumstances: 
          (a)  Whether bodily
harm results or not, if the person shall intentionally, knowingly or
recklessly: 
              (i)  Burn any
child;
              (ii)  Physically
torture any child;
              (iii)  Strangle,
choke, smother or in any way interfere with any child's breathing;
              (iv)  Poison a
child;
              (v)  Starve a child
of nourishments needed to sustain life or growth;
              (vi)  Use any type
of deadly weapon upon any child;
          (b)  If some bodily
harm to any child actually occurs, and if the person shall intentionally,
knowingly or recklessly:
              (i)  Throw, kick,
bite, or cut any child;
              (ii)  Strike a
child under the age of fourteen (14) about the face or head with a closed fist;
              (iii)  Strike a
child under the age of five (5) in the face or head;
              (iv)  Kick, bite,
cut or strike a child's genitals; circumcision of a male child is not a
violation under this subparagraph (iv);
          (c)  If serious bodily
harm to any child actually occurs, and if the person shall intentionally,
knowingly or recklessly:
              (i)  Strike any
child on the face or head;
              (ii)  Disfigure or
scar any child;
              (iii)  Whip, strike
or otherwise abuse any child;
          (d)  If the person violates
subsection (1) of Section 2 of this act.
          ( * * *de)  Any person, upon conviction under
paragraph (a) or (c) of this subsection, shall be sentenced by the court to
imprisonment in the custody of the Department of Corrections for a term of not
less than five (5) years and up to life, as determined by the court.  Any person,
upon conviction under paragraph (b) or (d) of this subsection shall be
sentenced by the court to imprisonment in the custody of the Department of
Corrections for a term of not less than two (2) years nor more than ten (10)
years, as determined by the court.  For any second or subsequent conviction
under this subsection (2), the person shall be sentenced to imprisonment for
life.
          ( * * *ef)  For the purposes of this subsection
(2), "bodily harm" means any bodily injury to a child and includes,
but is not limited to, bruising, bleeding, lacerations, soft tissue swelling,
and external or internal swelling of any body organ.
          ( * * *fg)  For the purposes of this subsection
(2), "serious bodily harm" means any serious bodily injury to a child
and includes, but is not limited to, the fracture of a bone, permanent
disfigurement, permanent scarring, or any internal bleeding or internal trauma
to any organ, any brain damage, the removal of genitals from the child's body
in violation of paragraph (d) of this subsection, or implant of genitals to the
child's body in violation of paragraph (d) of this subsection, any injury
to the eye or ear of a child or other vital organ, and impairment of any bodily
function. 
          ( * * *gh)  Nothing contained in paragraph (c) of
this subsection shall preclude a parent or guardian from disciplining a child
of that parent or guardian, or shall preclude a person in loco parentis to a
child from disciplining that child, if done in a reasonable manner, and
reasonable corporal punishment or reasonable discipline as to that parent or
guardian's child or child to whom a person stands in loco parentis shall be a
defense to any violation charged under paragraph (c) of this subsection.
          ( * * *hi)  Reasonable discipline and
reasonable corporal punishment shall not be a defense to acts described in
paragraphs (a) and (b) of this subsection or if a child suffers serious bodily
harm as a result of any act prohibited under paragraph (c) of this subsection.
     (3)  Nothing contained in
this section shall prevent proceedings against the parent, guardian or other
person under any statute of this state or any municipal ordinance defining any
act as a crime or misdemeanor.  Nothing in the provisions of this section shall
preclude any person from having a right to trial by jury when charged with
having violated the provisions of this section.
     (4)  (a)  A parent, legal
guardian or caretaker who endangers a child's person or health by knowingly
causing or permitting the child to be present where any person is selling, manufacturing
or possessing immediate precursors or chemical substances with intent to
manufacture, sell or possess a controlled substance as prohibited under Section
41-29-139 or 41-29-313, is guilty of child endangerment and may be sentenced to
imprisonment for not more than ten (10) years or to payment of a fine of not
more than Ten Thousand Dollars ($10,000.00), or both.
          (b)  If the
endangerment results in substantial harm to the child's physical, mental or
emotional health, the person may be sentenced to imprisonment for not more than
twenty (20) years or to payment of a fine of not more than Twenty Thousand
Dollars ($20,000.00), or both.
     (5)  Nothing contained in
this section shall prevent proceedings against the parent, guardian or other person
under any statute of this state or any municipal ordinance defining any act as
a crime or misdemeanor.  Nothing in the provisions of this section shall preclude
any person from having a right to trial by jury when charged with having
violated the provisions of this section.
     (6)  After consultation with
the Department of Human Services, a regional mental health center or an
appropriate professional person, a judge may suspend imposition or execution of
a sentence provided in subsections (1) and (2) of this section and in lieu
thereof require treatment over a specified period of time at any approved
public or private treatment facility.  A person may be eligible for treatment
in lieu of criminal penalties no more than one (1) time.
     (7)  In any proceeding
resulting from a report made pursuant to Section 43-21-353 of the Youth Court
Law, the testimony of the physician making the report regarding the child's
injuries or condition or cause thereof shall not be excluded on the ground that
the physician's testimony violates the physician-patient privilege or similar
privilege or rule against disclosure.  The physician's report shall not be
considered as evidence unless introduced as an exhibit to his testimony.
     (8)  Any criminal
prosecution arising from a violation of this section shall be tried in the
circuit, county, justice or municipal court having jurisdiction; provided,
however, that nothing herein shall abridge or dilute the contempt powers of the
youth court.
     SECTION 4.  Section
43-21-105, Mississippi Code of 1972, is amended as follows:
     43-21-105.  The following
words and phrases, for purposes of this chapter, shall have the meanings
ascribed herein unless the context clearly otherwise requires:
          (a)  "Youth court"
means the Youth Court Division.
          (b)  "Judge"
means the judge of the Youth Court Division.
          (c)  "Designee"
means any person that the judge appoints to perform a duty which this chapter
requires to be done by the judge or his designee.  The judge may not appoint a
person who is involved in law enforcement or who is an employee of the
Mississippi Department of Human Services or the Mississippi Department of Child
Protection Services to be his designee.
          (d)  "Child"
and "youth" are synonymous, and each means a person who has not reached
his eighteenth birthday.  A child who has not reached his eighteenth birthday
and is on active duty for a branch of the armed services or is married is not
considered a "child" or "youth" for the purposes of this chapter.
          (e)  "Parent"
means the father or mother to whom the child has been born, or the father or
mother by whom the child has been legally adopted.
          (f)  "Guardian"
means a court-appointed guardian of the person of a child.
          (g)  "Custodian"
means any person having the present care or custody of a child whether such
person be a parent or otherwise.
          (h)  "Legal
custodian" means a court-appointed custodian of the child.
          (i)  "Delinquent
child" means a child who has reached his tenth birthday and who has
committed a delinquent act.
          (j)  "Delinquent
act" is any act, which if committed by an adult, is designated as a crime
under state or federal law, or municipal or county ordinance other than
offenses punishable by life imprisonment or death.  A delinquent act includes
escape from lawful detention and violations of the Uniform Controlled
Substances Law and violent behavior.
          (k)  "Child in
need of supervision" means a child who has reached his seventh birthday
and is in need of treatment or rehabilitation because the child:
              (i)  Is habitually
disobedient of reasonable and lawful commands of his parent, guardian or
custodian and is ungovernable; or
              (ii)  While being
required to attend school, willfully and habitually violates the rules thereof
or willfully and habitually absents himself therefrom; or
               (iii)  Runs away
from home without good cause; or
              (iv)  Has committed
a delinquent act or acts.
          (l)  "Neglected
child" means a child:
              (i)  Whose parent,
guardian or custodian or any person responsible for his care or support,
neglects or refuses, when able so to do, to provide for him proper and
necessary care or support, or education as required by law, or medical,
surgical, or other care necessary for his well-being; however, a parent who
withholds medical treatment from any child who in good faith is under treatment
by spiritual means alone through prayer in accordance with the tenets and
practices of a recognized church or religious denomination by a duly accredited
practitioner thereof shall not, for that reason alone, be considered to be
neglectful under any provision of this chapter; or
              (ii)  Who is
otherwise without proper care, custody, supervision or support; or
              (iii)  Who, for any
reason, lacks the special care made necessary for him by reason of his mental
condition, whether the mental condition is having mental illness or having an
intellectual disability; or
              (iv)  Who, for any
reason, lacks the care necessary for his health, morals or well-being.
          (m)  "Abused child"
means a child whose parent, guardian or custodian or any person responsible for
his care or support, whether legally obligated to do so or not, has caused or
allowed to be caused, upon the child, sexual abuse, sexual exploitation,
commercial sexual exploitation, emotional abuse, mental injury, nonaccidental physical
injury, the administration, supply, consent to, or assistance in administering
or supplying a puberty-blocking drug or cross-sex hormone, gender transition procedures
or gender reassignment surgery or other maltreatment.  However, physical
discipline, including spanking, performed on a child by a parent, guardian or
custodian in a reasonable manner shall not be deemed abuse under this section. 
"Abused child" also means a child who is or has been trafficked
within the meaning of the Mississippi Human Trafficking Act by any person,
without regard to the relationship of the person to the child.
          (n)  "Sexual abuse"
means obscene or pornographic photographing, filming or depiction of children
for commercial purposes, or the rape, molestation, incest, prostitution or
other such forms of sexual exploitation of children under circumstances which
indicate that the child's health or welfare is harmed or threatened.
          (o)  "A child in
need of special care" means a child with any mental or physical illness
that cannot be treated with the dispositional alternatives ordinarily available
to the youth court.
          (p)  A "dependent
child" means any child who is not a child in need of supervision, a
delinquent child, an abused child or a neglected child, and which child has been
voluntarily placed in the custody of the Department of Child Protection
Services by his parent, guardian or custodian.
          (q)  "Custody"
means the physical possession of the child by any person.
          (r)  "Legal custody"
means the legal status created by a court order which gives the legal custodian
the responsibilities of physical possession of the child and the duty to
provide him with food, shelter, education and reasonable medical care, all
subject to residual rights and responsibilities of the parent or guardian of
the person.
          (s)  "Detention"
means the care of children in physically restrictive facilities.
          (t)  "Shelter"
means care of children in physically nonrestrictive facilities.
          (u)  "Records
involving children" means any of the following from which the child can be
identified:
              (i)  All youth
court records as defined in Section 43-21-251;
              (ii)  All forensic
interviews conducted by a child advocacy center in abuse and neglect
investigations;
              (iii)  All law
enforcement records as defined in Section 43-21-255;
              (iv)  All agency
records as defined in Section 43-21-257; and
              (v)  All other
documents maintained by any representative of the state, county, municipality
or other public agency insofar as they relate to the apprehension, custody,
adjudication or disposition of a child who is the subject of a youth court
cause.
          (v)  "Any person
responsible for care or support" means the person who is providing for the
child at a given time.  This term shall include, but is not limited to, stepparents,
foster parents, relatives, nonlicensed babysitters or other similar persons
responsible for a child and staff of residential care facilities and group
homes that are licensed by the Department of Human Services or the Department
of Child Protection Services.
          (w)  The singular
includes the plural, the plural the singular and the masculine the feminine
when consistent with the intent of this chapter.
          (x)  "Out-of-home"
setting means the temporary supervision or care of children by the staff of licensed
day care centers, the staff of public, private and state schools, the staff of
juvenile detention facilities, the staff of unlicensed residential care
facilities and group homes and the staff of, or individuals representing, churches,
civic or social organizations.
          (y)  "Durable
legal custody" means the legal status created by a court order which gives
the durable legal custodian the responsibilities of physical possession of the
child and the duty to provide him with care, nurture, welfare, food, shelter,
education and reasonable medical care.  All these duties as enumerated are
subject to the residual rights and responsibilities of the natural parent(s) or
guardian(s) of the child or children.
          (z)  "Status
offense" means conduct subject to adjudication by the youth court that
would not be a crime if committed by an adult.
          (aa)  "Financially
able" means a parent or child who is ineligible for a court-appointed
attorney.
          (bb)  "Assessment"
means an individualized examination of a child to determine the child's
psychosocial needs and problems, including the type and extent of any mental
health, substance abuse or co-occurring mental health and substance abuse
disorders and recommendations for treatment.  The term includes, but is not
limited to, a drug and alcohol, psychological or psychiatric evaluation,
records review, clinical interview or the administration of a formal test and
instrument.
          (cc)  "Screening"
means a process, with or without the administration of a formal instrument, that
is designed to identify a child who is at increased risk of having mental
health, substance abuse or co-occurring mental health and substance abuse disorders
that warrant immediate attention, intervention or more comprehensive assessment.
          (dd)  "Durable legal
relative guardianship" means the legal status created by a youth court
order that conveys the physical and legal custody of a child or children by
durable legal guardianship to a relative or fictive kin who is licensed as a
foster or resource parent.
          (ee)  "Relative"
means a person related to the child by affinity or consanguinity within the
third degree.
          (ff)  "Fictive kin"
means a person not related to the child legally or biologically but who is
considered a relative due to a significant, familial-like and ongoing
relationship with the child and family.
          (gg)  "Reasonable
efforts" means the exercise of reasonable care and due diligence by the
Department of Human Services, the Department of Child Protection Services, or
any other appropriate entity or person to use appropriate and available
services to prevent the unnecessary removal of the child from the home or
provide other services related to meeting the needs of the child and the
parents.
          (hh)  "Commercial
sexual exploitation" means any sexual act or crime of a sexual nature,
which is committed against a child for financial or economic gain, to obtain a
thing of value for quid pro quo exchange of property or for any other purpose.
     SECTION 5.  Section
97-5-51, Mississippi Code of 1972, is amended as follows:
     97-5-51.  (1)  Definitions. 
For the purposes of this section:
          (a)  "Sex crime
against a minor" means any offense under at least one (1) of the
following statutes when committed by an adult against a minor who is under the
age of sixteen (16):  
              (i)  Section 97-3-65
relating to rape; 
              (ii)  Section 97-3-71
relating to rape and assault with intent to ravish;
              (iii)  Section 97-3-95
relating to sexual battery;
              (iv)  Section 97-5-23
relating to the touching of a child, mentally defective or incapacitated person
or physically helpless person for lustful purposes;
              (v)  Section 97-5-41
relating to the carnal knowledge of a stepchild, adopted child or child of a
cohabiting partner;
              (vi)  Section 97-5-33
relating to exploitation of children;
              (vii)  Section 97-3-54.1(1)(c)
relating to procuring sexual servitude of a minor;
              (viii)  Section 43-47-18
relating to sexual abuse of a vulnerable person;
              (ix)  Section 97-1-7
relating to the attempt to commit any of the offenses listed in this subsection;

              (x)  Section 97-29-51
relating to procuring sexual services of a minor; * * *and
              (xi)  Section 43-47-18
and Section 43-47-19 relating to sexual battery abuse of a vulnerable person
who is a minor * * *.;
and
               (xii)  Subsection
(1) of Section 3 of this act.
          (b)  "Mandatory
reporter" means any of the following individuals performing their
occupational duties:  health care practitioner, clergy member, teaching or
child care provider, law enforcement officer, or commercial image processor.
          (c)  "Health care
practitioner" means any individual who provides health care services,
including a physician, surgeon, physical therapist, psychiatrist, psychologist,
medical resident, medical intern, hospital staff member, licensed nurse, midwife
and emergency medical technician or paramedic.
          (d)  "Clergy
member" means any priest, rabbi or duly ordained deacon or minister.
          (e)  "Teaching or
child care provider" means anyone who provides training or supervision of
a minor under the age of sixteen (16), including a teacher, teacher's aide,
principal or staff member of a public or private school, social worker,
probation officer, foster home parent, group home or other child care
institutional staff member, personnel of residential home facilities, a
licensed or unlicensed day care provider.
          (f)  "Commercial
image processor" means any person who, for compensation:  (i) develops
exposed photographic film into negatives, slides or prints; (ii) makes prints
from negatives or slides; or (iii) processes or stores
digital media or images from any digital process, including, but not
limited to, website applications, photography, live streaming of video,
posting, creation of power points or any other means of intellectual property
communication or media including conversion or manipulation of still shots or
video into a digital show stored on a photography site or a media storage site.
          (g)  "Caretaker"
means any person legally obligated to provide or secure adequate care for a
minor under the age of sixteen (16), including a parent, guardian, tutor, legal
custodian or foster home parent.
     (2)  (a)  Mandatory
reporter requirement.  A mandatory reporter shall make a report if it would
be reasonable for the mandatory reporter to suspect that a sex crime against a
minor has occurred.
          (b)  Failure to file a
mandatory report shall be punished as provided in this section.
          (c)  Reports made under
this section and the identity of the mandatory reporter are confidential except
when the court determines the testimony of the person reporting to be material
to a judicial proceeding or when the identity of the reporter is released to
law enforcement agencies and the appropriate prosecutor.  The identity of the
reporting party shall not be disclosed to anyone other than law enforcement or
prosecutors except under court order; violation of this requirement is a
misdemeanor.  Reports made under this section are for the purpose of criminal
investigation and prosecution only and information from these reports is not a public
record.  Disclosure of any information by the prosecutor shall conform to the
Mississippi Uniform Rules of Circuit and County Court Procedure.
          (d)  Any mandatory
reporter who makes a required report under this section or participates in a judicial
proceeding resulting from a mandatory report shall be presumed to be acting in good
faith.  Any person or institution reporting in good faith shall be immune from
any liability, civil or criminal, that might otherwise be incurred or imposed.
     (3)  (a)  Mandatory
reporting procedure.  A report required under subsection (2) must be made
immediately to the law enforcement agency in whose jurisdiction the reporter
believes the sex crime against the minor occurred.  Except as otherwise
provided in this subsection (3), a mandatory reporter may not delegate to any
other person the responsibility to report, but shall make the report
personally.
              (i)  The reporting
requirement under this subsection (3) is satisfied if a mandatory reporter in
good faith reports a suspected sex crime against a minor to the Department of
Child Protection Services under Section 43-21-353.
              (ii)  The reporting
requirement under this subsection (3) is satisfied if a mandatory reporter
reports a suspected sex crime against a minor by following a reporting
procedure that is imposed:
                   1.  By state
agency rule as part of licensure of any person or entity holding a state
license to provide services that include the treatment or education of abused
or neglected children; or
                   2.  By statute.
          (b)  Contents of the
report.  The report shall identify, to the extent known to the reporter,
the following:
              (i)  The name and
address of the minor victim;
              (ii)  The name and
address of the minor's caretaker;
              (iii)  Any other
pertinent information known to the reporter.
     (4)  A law enforcement
officer who receives a mandated report under this section shall file an
affidavit against the offender on behalf of the State of Mississippi if there
is probable cause to believe that the offender has committed a sex crime
against a minor.
     (5)  Collection of
forensic samples.  (a)  (i)  When an abortion is performed on a minor who
is less than fourteen (14) years of age at the time of the abortion procedure,
fetal tissue extracted during the abortion shall be collected in accordance
with rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this section if it would be
reasonable to suspect that the pregnancy being terminated is the result of a
sex crime against a minor.
              (ii)  When a minor
who is under sixteen (16) years of age gives birth to an infant, umbilical cord
blood shall be collected, if possible, in accordance with rules and regulations
adopted pursuant to this section if it would be reasonable to suspect that the
minor's pregnancy resulted from a sex crime against a minor.
              (iii)  It shall be
reasonable to suspect that a sex crime against a minor has occurred if the
mother of an infant was less than sixteen (16) years of age at the time of
conception and at least one (1) of the following conditions also applies:
                   1.  The mother
of the infant will not identify the father of the infant;
                   2.  The mother
of the infant lists the father of the infant as unknown;
                   3.  The person
the mother identifies as the father of the infant disputes his fatherhood;
                   4.  The person
the mother identifies as the father of the infant is twenty-one (21) years of
age or older; or
                   5.  The person
the mother identifies as the father is deceased.
          (b)  The State Medical
Examiner shall adopt rules and regulations consistent with Section 99-49-1 that
prescribe:
              (i)  The amount and
type of fetal tissue or umbilical cord blood to be collected pursuant to
this section;
              (ii)  Procedures
for the proper preservation of the tissue or blood for the purpose of DNA testing
and examination;
              (iii)  Procedures
for documenting the chain of custody of such tissue or blood for use as
evidence;
              (iv)  Procedures
for proper disposal of fetal tissue or umbilical cord blood collected
pursuant to this section;
              (v)  A uniform reporting
instrument mandated to be utilized, which shall include the complete residence
address and name of the parent or legal guardian of the minor who is the
subject of the report required under this subsection (5); and
              (vi)  Procedures
for communication with law enforcement agencies regarding evidence and
information obtained pursuant to this section.
     (6)  Penalties. 
(a)  A person who is convicted of a first offense under this section shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and fined not more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00).
          (b)  A person who is
convicted of a second offense under this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and fined not more than One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00), or
imprisoned for not more than thirty (30) days, or both.
          (c)  A person who is
convicted of a third or subsequent offense under this section shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor and fined not more than Five Thousand Dollars ($5,000.00), or
imprisoned for not more than one (1) year, or both.
     (7)  A health care practitioner
or health care facility shall be immune from any penalty, civil or
criminal, for good-faith compliance with any rules and regulations adopted pursuant
to this section.
     SECTION 6.  Prohibition
on use of public funds or tax deduction for gender transition procedures.  (1)
 Public funds shall not be directly or indirectly used, granted, paid, or
distributed to any entity, organization, or individual that provides gender
transition procedures to a person under twenty-one (21) years of age.
     (2)  Health care services
furnished in the following situations shall not include gender transition
procedures for a person under twenty-one (21) years of age:
          (a)  By or in a health care
facility owned by the state or a county or local government; or
          (b)  By a physician or
other health care professional employed by the state or a county or local
government.
     (3)  Any amount paid by an
individual or an entity during a taxable year for provision of gender
transition procedures or as premiums for health care coverage that includes
coverage for gender transition procedures is not deductible under the state income
tax laws.
     SECTION 7.  Enforcement.
 (1)  Any referral for or provision of gender transition procedures to a person
under twenty-one (21) years of age by a physician or other health care professional
is unprofessional conduct and is subject to discipline by the appropriate
licensing entity for the health care professional.
     (2)  A person may assert an
actual or threatened violation of this act as a claim or defense in a judicial or
administrative proceeding and obtain compensatory damages, injunctive relief,
declaratory relief, or any other appropriate relief.
     (3)  (a)  A person must
bring a claim for a violation of this act no later than two (2) years after the
day the cause of action accrues.
          (b)  A person under twenty-one
(21) years of age may bring an action throughout their minority through a
parent or next friend, and may bring an action in their own name upon reaching
majority at any time from that point until twenty (20) years after reaching the
age of majority.
     (4)  Notwithstanding any
other provision of law, an action under this act may be commenced, and relief
may be granted, in a judicial proceeding without regard to whether the person
commencing the action has sought or exhausted available administrative remedies.
     (5)  In any action or
proceeding to enforce a provision of this act, a prevailing party who
establishes a violation of this act shall recover reasonable attorney's fees.
     (6)  (a)  The Attorney General
may bring an action to enforce compliance with this act.
          (b)  This act does not
deny, impair, or otherwise affect any right or authority of the Attorney
General, the State of Mississippi, or any agency, officer, or employee of the
state, acting under any law other than this act, to institute or intervene in
any proceeding.
     SECTION 8.  Section
27-7-17, Mississippi Code of 1972, is amended as follows:
     27-7-17.  In computing taxable
income, there shall be allowed as deductions:
     (1)  Business deductions.
          (a)  Business expenses. 
All the ordinary and necessary expenses paid or incurred during the taxable year
in carrying on any trade or business, including a reasonable allowance for salaries
or other compensation for personal services actually rendered; nonreimbursable traveling
expenses incident to current employment, including a reasonable amount expended
for meals and lodging while away from home in the pursuit of a trade or business;
and rentals or other payments required to be made as a condition of the continued
use or possession, for purposes of the trade or business of property to which the
taxpayer has not taken or is not taking title or in which he had no equity.  Expense
incurred in connection with earning and distributing nontaxable income is not an
allowable deduction.  Limitations on entertainment expenses shall conform to the
provisions of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.  There shall also be allowed a
deduction for expenses as provided in Section 41-137-51.
          (b)  Interest.  All
interest paid or accrued during the taxable year on business indebtedness, except
interest upon the indebtedness for the purchase of tax-free bonds, or any stocks,
the dividends from which are nontaxable under the provisions of this article; provided,
however, in the case of securities dealers, interest payments or accruals on loans,
the proceeds of which are used to purchase tax-exempt securities, shall be deductible
if income from otherwise tax-free securities is reported as income.  Investment
interest expense shall be limited to investment income.  Interest expense incurred
for the purchase of treasury stock, to pay dividends, or incurred as a result of
an undercapitalized affiliated corporation may not be deducted unless an ordinary
and necessary business purpose can be established to the satisfaction of the commissioner. 
For the purposes of this paragraph, the phrase "interest upon the indebtedness
for the purchase of tax-free bonds" applies only to the indebtedness incurred
for the purpose of directly purchasing tax-free bonds and does not apply to any
other indebtedness incurred in the regular course of the taxpayer's business.  Any
corporation, association, organization or other entity taxable under Section 27-7-23(c)
shall allocate interest expense as provided in Section 27-7-23(c)(3)(I).
          (c)  Taxes.  Taxes
paid or accrued within the taxable year, except state and federal income taxes,
excise taxes based on or measured by net income, estate and inheritance taxes, gift
taxes, cigar and cigarette taxes, gasoline taxes, and sales and use taxes unless
incurred as an item of expense in a trade or business or in the production of taxable
income.  In the case of an individual, taxes permitted as an itemized deduction
under the provisions of subsection (3)(a) of this section are to be claimed thereunder.
          (d)  Business losses.
              (i)  Losses sustained
during the taxable year not compensated for by insurance or otherwise, if incurred
in trade or business, or nonbusiness transactions entered into for profit.
               (ii)  Limitations on
losses from passive activities and rental real estate shall conform to the provisions
of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
          (e)  Bad debts. 
Losses from debts ascertained to be worthless and charged off during the taxable
year, if sustained in the conduct of the regular trade or business of the taxpayer;
provided, that such losses shall be allowed only when the taxpayer has reported
as income, on the accrual basis, the amount of such debt or account.
          (f)  Depreciation. 
A reasonable allowance for exhaustion, wear and tear of property used in the trade
or business, or rental property, and depreciation upon buildings based upon their
reasonable value as of March 16, 1912, if acquired prior thereto, and upon cost
if acquired subsequent to that date.  In the case of new or used aircraft, equipment,
engines, or other parts and tools used for aviation, allowance for bonus depreciation
conforms with the federal bonus depreciation rates and reasonable allowance for
depreciation under this section is no less than one hundred percent (100%). 
          (g)  Depletion. 
In the case of mines, oil and gas wells, other natural deposits and timber, a reasonable
allowance for depletion and for depreciation of improvements, based upon cost, including
cost of development, not otherwise deducted, or fair market value as of March 16,
1912, if acquired prior to that date, such allowance to be made upon regulations
prescribed by the commissioner, with the approval of the Governor.
          (h)  Contributions or
gifts.  Except as otherwise provided in paragraph (p) of this subsection or
subsection (3)(a) of this section for individuals, contributions or gifts made by
corporations within the taxable year to corporations, organizations, associations
or institutions, including Community Chest funds, foundations and trusts created
solely and exclusively for religious, charitable, scientific or educational purposes,
or for the prevention of cruelty to children or animals, no part of the net earnings
of which inure to the benefit of any private stockholder or individual.  This deduction
shall be allowed in an amount not to exceed twenty percent (20%) of the net income. 
Such contributions or gifts shall be allowable as deductions only if verified under
rules and regulations prescribed by the commissioner, with the approval of the Governor. 
Contributions made in any form other than cash shall be allowed as a deduction,
subject to the limitations herein provided, in an amount equal to the actual market
value of the contributions at the time the contribution is actually made and consummated.
          (i)  Reserve funds -
insurance companies.  In the case of insurance companies the net additions required
by law to be made within the taxable year to reserve funds when such reserve funds
are maintained for the purpose of liquidating policies at maturity.
          (j)  Annuity income. 
The sums, other than dividends, paid within the taxpayer year on policy or annuity
contracts when such income has been included in gross income.
          (k)  Contributions to
employee pension plans.  Contributions made by an employer to a plan or a trust
forming part of a pension plan, stock bonus plan, disability or death-benefit plan,
or profit-sharing plan of such employer for the exclusive benefit of some or all
of his, their, or its employees, or their beneficiaries, shall be deductible from
his, their, or its income only to the extent that, and for the taxable year in which,
the contribution is deductible for federal income tax purposes under the Internal
Revenue Code of 1986 and any other provisions of similar purport in the Internal
Revenue Laws of the United States, and the rules, regulations, rulings and determinations
promulgated thereunder, provided that:
              (i)  The plan or trust
be irrevocable.
               (ii)  The plan or trust
constitute a part of a pension plan, stock bonus plan, disability or death-benefit
plan, or profit-sharing plan for the exclusive benefit of some or all of the employer's
employees and/or officers, or their beneficiaries, for the purpose of distributing
the corpus and income of the plan or trust to such employees and/or officers, or
their beneficiaries.
              (iii)  No part of the
corpus or income of the plan or trust can be used for purposes other than for the
exclusive benefit of employees and/or officers, or their beneficiaries.
     Contributions to all plans or
to all trusts of real or personal property (or real and personal property combined)
or to insured plans created under a retirement plan for which provision has been
made under the laws of the United States of America, making such contributions deductible
from income for federal income tax purposes, shall be deductible only to the same
extent under the Income Tax Laws of the State of Mississippi.
          (l)  Net operating loss
carrybacks and carryovers.  A net operating loss for any taxable year ending
after December 31, 1993, and taxable years thereafter, shall be a net operating
loss carryback to each of the three (3) taxable years preceding the taxable year
of the loss.  If the net operating loss for any taxable year is not exhausted by
carrybacks to the three (3) taxable years preceding the taxable year of the loss,
then there shall be a net operating loss carryover to each of the fifteen (15) taxable
years following the taxable year of the loss beginning with any taxable year after
December 31, 1991.
     For any taxable year ending after
December 31, 1997, the period for net operating loss carrybacks and net operating
loss carryovers shall be the same as those established by the Internal Revenue Code
and the rules, regulations, rulings and determinations promulgated thereunder as
in effect at the taxable year end or on December 31, 2000, whichever is earlier.
     A net operating loss for any
taxable year ending after December 31, 2001, and taxable years thereafter, shall
be a net operating loss carryback to each of the two (2) taxable years preceding
the taxable year of the loss.  If the net operating loss for any taxable year is
not exhausted by carrybacks to the two (2) taxable years preceding the taxable year
of the loss, then there shall be a net operating loss carryover to each of the twenty
(20) taxable years following the taxable year of the loss beginning with any taxable
year after the taxable year of the loss.
     The term "net operating
loss," for the purposes of this paragraph, shall be the excess of the deductions
allowed over the gross income; provided, however, the following deductions shall
not be allowed in computing same:
               (i)  No net operating
loss deduction shall be allowed.
              (ii)  No personal exemption
deduction shall be allowed.
              (iii)  Allowable deductions
which are not attributable to taxpayer's trade or business shall be allowed only
to the extent of the amount of gross income not derived from such trade or business.
     Any taxpayer entitled to a carryback
period as provided by this paragraph may elect to relinquish the entire carryback
period with respect to a net operating loss for any taxable year ending after December
31, 1991.  The election shall be made in the manner prescribed by the Department
of Revenue and shall be made by the due date, including extensions of time, for
filing the taxpayer's return for the taxable year of the net operating loss for
which the election is to be in effect.  The election, once made for any taxable
year, shall be irrevocable for that taxable year.
          (m)  Amortization of
pollution or environmental control facilities.  Allowance of deduction.  Every
taxpayer, at his election, shall be entitled to a deduction for pollution or environmental
control facilities to the same extent as that allowed under the Internal Revenue
Code and the rules, regulations, rulings and determinations promulgated thereunder.
          (n)  Dividend distributions
- real estate investment trusts.  "Real estate investment trust" (hereinafter
referred to as REIT) shall have the meaning ascribed to such term in Section 856
of the federal Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended.  A REIT is allowed a dividend
distributed deduction if the dividend distributions meet the requirements of Section
857 or are otherwise deductible under Section 858 or 860, federal Internal Revenue
Code of 1986, as amended.  In addition:
              (i)  A dividend distributed
deduction shall only be allowed for dividends paid by a publicly traded REIT.  A
qualified REIT subsidiary shall be allowed a dividend distributed deduction if its
owner is a publicly traded REIT.
              (ii)  Income generated
from real estate contributed or sold to a REIT by a shareholder or related party
shall not give rise to a dividend distributed deduction, unless the shareholder
or related party would have received the dividend distributed deduction under this
chapter.
              (iii)  A holding corporation
receiving a dividend from a REIT shall not be allowed the deduction in Section 27-7-15(4)(t).
              (iv)  Any REIT not allowed
the dividend distributed deduction in the federal Internal Revenue Code of 1986,
as amended, shall not be allowed a dividend distributed deduction under this chapter.
     The commissioner is authorized
to promulgate rules and regulations consistent with the provisions in Section 269
of the federal Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, so as to prevent the evasion
or avoidance of state income tax.
          (o)  Contributions to
college savings trust fund accounts.  Contributions or payments to a Mississippi
Affordable College Savings Program account are deductible as provided under Section
37-155-113.  Payments made under a prepaid tuition contract entered into under the
Mississippi Prepaid Affordable College Tuition Program are deductible as provided
under Section 37-155-17.
          (p)  Contributions of
human pharmaceutical products.  To the extent that a "major supplier"
as defined in Section 27-13-13(2)(d) contributes human pharmaceutical products in
excess of Two Hundred Fifty Million Dollars ($250,000,000.00) as determined under
Section 170 of the Internal Revenue Code, the charitable contribution limitation
associated with those donations shall follow the federal limitation but cannot result
in the Mississippi net income being reduced below zero.
          (q)  Contributions to
ABLE trust fund accounts.  Contributions or payments to a Mississippi Achieving
a Better Life Experience (ABLE) Program account are deductible as provided under
Section 43-28-13.
     (2)  Restrictions on the deductibility
of certain intangible expenses and interest expenses with a related member.
          (a)  As used in this subsection
(2):
              (i)  "Intangible
expenses and costs" include:
                   1.  Expenses, losses
and costs for, related to, or in connection directly or indirectly with the direct
or indirect acquisition, use, maintenance or management, ownership, sale, exchange
or any other disposition of intangible property to the extent such amounts are allowed
as deductions or costs in determining taxable income under this chapter;
                   2.  Expenses or
losses related to or incurred in connection directly or indirectly with factoring
transactions or discounting transactions;
                    3.  Royalty, patent,
technical and copyright fees;
                   4.  Licensing fees;
and 
                   5.  Other similar
expenses and costs.
               (ii)  "Intangible
property" means patents, patent applications, trade names, trademarks, service
marks, copyrights and similar types of intangible assets.
              (iii)  "Interest
expenses and cost" means amounts directly or indirectly allowed as deductions
for purposes of determining taxable income under this chapter to the extent such
interest expenses and costs are directly or indirectly for, related to, or in connection
with the direct or indirect acquisition, maintenance, management, ownership, sale,
exchange or disposition of intangible property.
              (iv)  "Related
member" means an entity or person that, with respect to the taxpayer during
all or any portion of the taxable year, is a related entity, a component member
as defined in the Internal Revenue Code, or is an entity or a person to or from
whom there is attribution of stock ownership in accordance with Section 1563(e)
of the Internal Revenue Code.
               (v)  "Related
entity" means:
                   1.  A stockholder
who is an individual or a member of the stockholder's family, as defined in regulations
prescribed by the commissioner, if the stockholder and the members of the stockholder's
family own, directly, indirectly, beneficially or constructively, in the aggregate,
at least fifty percent (50%) of the value of the taxpayer's outstanding stock;
                   2.  A stockholder,
or a stockholder's partnership, limited liability company, estate, trust or corporation,
if the stockholder and the stockholder's partnerships, limited liability companies,
estates, trusts and corporations own, directly, indirectly, beneficially or constructively,
in the aggregate, at least fifty percent (50%) of the value of the taxpayer's outstanding
stock;
                   3.  A corporation,
or a party related to the corporation in a manner that would require an attribution
of stock from the corporation to the party or from the party to the corporation,
if the taxpayer owns, directly, indirectly, beneficially or constructively, at least
fifty percent (50%) of the value of the corporation's outstanding stock under regulation
prescribed by the commissioner;
                   4.  Any entity
or person which would be a related member under this section if the taxpayer were
considered a corporation for purposes of this section.
          (b)  In computing net income,
a taxpayer shall add back otherwise deductible interest expenses and costs and intangible
expenses and costs directly or indirectly paid, accrued to or incurred, in connection
directly or indirectly with one or more direct or indirect transactions with one
or more related members.
          (c)  The adjustments required
by this subsection shall not apply to such portion of interest expenses and costs
and intangible expenses and costs that the taxpayer can establish meets one (1)
of the following:
              (i)  The related member
directly or indirectly paid, accrued or incurred such portion to a person during
the same income year who is not a related member; or
              (ii)  The transaction
giving rise to the interest expenses and costs or intangible expenses and costs
between the taxpayer and related member was done primarily for a valid business
purpose other than the avoidance of taxes, and the related member is not primarily
engaged in the acquisition, use, maintenance or management, ownership, sale, exchange
or any other disposition of intangible property.
          (d)  Nothing in this subsection
shall require a taxpayer to add to its net income more than once any amount of interest
expenses and costs or intangible expenses and costs that the taxpayer pays, accrues
or incurs to a related member.
          (e)  The commissioner may
prescribe such regulations as necessary or appropriate to carry out the purposes
of this subsection, including, but not limited to, clarifying definitions of terms,
rules of stock attribution, factoring and discount transactions.
     (3)  Individual nonbusiness
deductions.
          (a)  The amount allowable
for individual nonbusiness itemized deductions for federal income tax purposes where
the individual is eligible to elect, for the taxable year, to itemize deductions
on his federal return except the following:
              (i)  The deduction for
state income taxes paid or other taxes allowed for federal purposes in lieu of state
income taxes paid;
              (ii)  The deduction
for gaming losses from gaming establishments;
              (iii)  The deduction
for taxes collected by licensed gaming establishments pursuant to Section
27-7-901;
              (iv)  The deduction
for taxes collected by gaming establishments pursuant to Section 27-7-903 * * *.; and
               (v)  The deduction
for medical expenses for the provision of puberty-blocking drugs, cross-sex hormones,
gender transition procedures or gender reassignment surgery as defined in Section
2 of this act.
          (b)  In lieu of the individual
nonbusiness itemized deductions authorized in paragraph (a), for all purposes other
than ordinary and necessary expenses paid or incurred during the taxable year in
carrying on any trade or business, an optional standard deduction of:
              (i)  Three Thousand
Four Hundred Dollars ($3,400.00) through calendar year 1997, Four Thousand Two Hundred
Dollars ($4,200.00) for the calendar year 1998 and Four Thousand Six Hundred Dollars
($4,600.00) for each calendar year thereafter in the case of married individuals
filing a joint or combined return;
              (ii)  One Thousand Seven
Hundred Dollars ($1,700.00) through calendar year 1997, Two Thousand One Hundred
Dollars ($2,100.00) for the calendar year 1998 and Two Thousand Three Hundred Dollars
($2,300.00) for each calendar year thereafter in the case of married individuals
filing separate returns;
              (iii)  Three Thousand
Four Hundred Dollars ($3,400.00) in the case of a head of family; or
               (iv)  Two Thousand
Three Hundred Dollars ($2,300.00) in the case of an individual who is not married.
     In the case of a husband and
wife living together, having separate incomes, and filing combined returns, the
standard deduction authorized may be divided in any manner they choose.  In the
case of separate returns by a husband and wife, the standard deduction shall not
be allowed to either if the taxable income of one of the spouses is determined without
regard to the standard deduction.
          (c)  A nonresident individual
shall be allowed the same individual nonbusiness deductions as are authorized for
resident individuals in paragraph (a) or (b) of this subsection; however, the nonresident
individual is entitled only to that proportion of the individual nonbusiness deductions
as his net income from sources within the State of Mississippi bears to his total
or entire net income from all sources.
     (4)  Nothing in this section
shall permit the same item to be deducted more than once, either in fact or in effect.
     (5)  Notwithstanding any other
provision in Title 27, Mississippi Code of 1972, there shall be allowed an income
tax deduction for otherwise deductible expenses if:
          (a)  The payment(s) for
such deductible expenses are made with the grant or loan program of the Paycheck
Protection Program as authorized under (i) the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic
Security (CARES) Act and the Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2021, (ii) the COVID-19
Economic Injury Disaster Loan Program, (iii) the 2020 COVID-19 Mississippi Business
Assistance Act, (iv) the Rental Assistance Grant Program, (v) the Shuttered Venue
Operators Grant Program and Restaurant Revitalization Fund authorized by the Economic
Aid to Hard-Hit Small Businesses, Nonprofits, and Venues Act, and amended by the
federal American Rescue Plan Act, and/or (vi) the Mississippi Agriculture Stabilization
Act; and
          (b)  Such deductible expenses
shall be allowed as deductions for federal income tax purposes.
     SECTION 9.  The
following shall be codified as Section 43-13-117.7, Mississippi Code of 1972:
     43-13-117.7.  Notwithstanding
any other provisions of Section 43-13-117, the division shall not reimburse or
provide coverage for gender transition procedures for a person under twenty-one
(21) years of age.  As used in this section, the term "gender transition
procedures" means the same as defined in Section 3 of this act.
     SECTION 10.  Section
73-15-29, Mississippi Code of 1972, is amended as follows:
     73-15-29.  (1)  The board shall
have power to revoke, suspend or refuse to renew any license issued by the board,
or to revoke or suspend any privilege to practice, or to deny an application for
a license, or to fine, place on probation and/or discipline a licensee, in any manner
specified in this article, upon proof that such person:
          (a)  Has committed fraud
or deceit in securing or attempting to secure such license;
          (b)  Has been convicted
of a felony, or a crime involving moral turpitude or has had accepted by a court
a plea of nolo contendere to a felony or a crime involving moral turpitude (a certified
copy of the judgment of the court of competent jurisdiction of such conviction or
pleas shall be prima facie evidence of such conviction);
          (c)  Has negligently or
willfully acted in a manner inconsistent with the health or safety of the persons
under the licensee's care;
          (d)  Has had a license or
privilege to practice as a registered nurse or a licensed practical nurse suspended
or revoked in any jurisdiction, has voluntarily surrendered such license or privilege
to practice in any jurisdiction, has been placed on probation as a registered nurse
or licensed practical nurse in any jurisdiction or has been placed under a disciplinary
order(s) in any manner as a registered nurse or licensed practical nurse in any
jurisdiction, (a certified copy of the order of suspension, revocation, probation
or disciplinary action shall be prima facie evidence of such action);
          (e)  Has negligently or
willfully practiced nursing in a manner that fails to meet generally accepted standards
of such nursing practice;
          (f)  Has negligently or
willfully violated any order, rule or regulation of the board pertaining to nursing
practice or licensure;
          (g)  Has falsified or in
a repeatedly negligent manner made incorrect entries or failed to make essential
entries on records;
          (h)  Is addicted to or dependent
on alcohol or other habit-forming drugs or is a habitual user of narcotics, barbiturates,
amphetamines, hallucinogens, or other drugs having similar effect, or has misappropriated
any medication;
          (i)  Has a physical, mental
or emotional condition that renders the licensee unable to perform nursing services
or duties with reasonable skill and safety;
          (j)  Has engaged in any
other conduct, whether of the same or of a different character from that specified
in this article, that would constitute a crime as defined in Title 97 of the Mississippi
Code of 1972, as now or hereafter amended, and that relates to such person's employment
as a registered nurse or licensed practical nurse;
          (k)  Engages in conduct
likely to deceive, defraud or harm the public;
          (l)  Engages in any unprofessional
conduct as identified by the board in its rules;
          (m)  Has violated any provision
of this article; * * *or
          (n)  Violation(s) of the
provisions of Sections 41-121-1 through 41-121-9 relating to deceptive advertisement
by health care practitioners.  This paragraph shall stand repealed on July 1, 2025 * * *.; or
          (o)  Violation(s) of
any provision of Sections 1 through 6 of this act.
     (2)  When the board finds any
person unqualified because of any of the grounds set forth in subsection (1) of
this section, it may enter an order imposing one or more of the following penalties:
          (a)  Denying application
for a license or other authorization to practice nursing or practical nursing;
          (b)  Administering a reprimand;
          (c)  Suspending or restricting
the license or other authorization to practice as a registered nurse or licensed
practical nurse for up to two (2) years without review;
          (d)  Revoking the license
or other authorization to practice nursing or practical nursing;
          (e)  Requiring the disciplinee
to submit to care, counseling or treatment by persons and/or agencies approved or
designated by the board as a condition for initial, continued or renewed licensure
or other authorization to practice nursing or practical nursing;
          (f)  Requiring the disciplinee
to participate in a program of education prescribed by the board as a condition
for initial, continued or renewed licensure or other authorization to practice;
          (g)  Requiring the disciplinee
to practice under the supervision of a registered nurse for a specified period of
time; or
          (h)  Imposing a fine not
to exceed Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00).
     (3)  In addition to the grounds
specified in subsection (1) of this section, the board shall be authorized to suspend
the license or privilege to practice of any licensee for being out of compliance
with an order for support, as defined in Section 93-11-153.  The procedure for suspension
of a license or privilege to practice for being out of compliance with an order
for support, and the procedure for the reissuance or reinstatement of a license
or privilege to practice suspended for that purpose, and the payment of any fees
for the reissuance or reinstatement of a license or privilege to practice suspended
for that purpose, shall be governed by Section 93-11-157 or 93-11-163, as the case
may be.  If there is any conflict between any provision of Section 93-11-157 or
93-11-163 and any provision of this article, the provisions of Section 93-11-157
or 93-11-163, as the case may be, shall control.
     (4)  If the public health, safety
or welfare imperatively requires emergency action and the board incorporates a finding
to that effect in an order, the board may order summary suspension of a license
pending proceedings for revocation or other action.  These proceedings shall be
promptly instituted and determined by the board.
     (5)  The board may establish
by rule an alternative to discipline program for licensees who have an impairment
as a result of substance abuse or a mental health condition, which program shall
include at least the following components:
          (a)  Participation in the
program is voluntary with the licensee, and the licensee must enter the program
before the board holds a disciplinary action hearing regarding the licensee;
          (b)  The full cost of participation
in the program, including the cost of any care, counseling, treatment and/or education
received by the licensee, shall be borne by the licensee;
          (c)  All of the procedures
and records regarding the licensee's participation in the program shall be confidential,
shall not be disclosed and shall be exempt from the provisions of the Mississippi
Public Records Act of 1983; and
          (d)  A licensee may not
participate in the program more often than one (1) time during any period of five
(5) years or such longer period as set by the board.
     (6)  A nurse practitioner who
provides a written certification as authorized under the Mississippi Medical Cannabis
Act and in compliance with rules and regulations adopted thereunder shall not be
subject to any disciplinary action under this section solely due to providing the
written certification.
     SECTION 11.  Section
73-25-29, Mississippi Code of 1972, is amended as follows:
     73-25-29.  The grounds for the
nonissuance, suspension, revocation or restriction of a license or the denial of
reinstatement or renewal of a license are:
          (1)  Habitual personal use
of narcotic drugs, or any other drug having addiction-forming or addiction-sustaining
liability.
          (2)  Habitual use of intoxicating
liquors, or any beverage, to an extent which affects professional competency.
          (3)  Administering, dispensing
or prescribing any narcotic drug, or any other drug having addiction-forming or
addiction-sustaining liability otherwise than in the course of legitimate professional
practice.
          (4)  Conviction of violation
of any federal or state law regulating the possession, distribution or use of any
narcotic drug or any drug considered a controlled substance under state or federal
law, a certified copy of the conviction order or judgment rendered by the trial
court being prima facie evidence thereof, notwithstanding the pendency of any appeal.
          (5)  Procuring, or attempting
to procure, or aiding in, an abortion that is not medically indicated.
          (6)  Conviction of a felony
or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, a certified copy of the conviction order
or judgment rendered by the trial court being prima facie evidence thereof, notwithstanding
the pendency of any appeal.
          (7)  Obtaining or attempting
to obtain a license by fraud or deception.
          (8)  Unprofessional conduct,
which includes, but is not limited to:
              (a)  Practicing medicine
under a false or assumed name or impersonating another practitioner, living or dead.
              (b)  Knowingly performing
any act which in any way assists an unlicensed person to practice medicine.
               (c)  Making or willfully
causing to be made any flamboyant claims concerning the licensee's professional
excellence.
              (d)  Being guilty of
any dishonorable or unethical conduct likely to deceive, defraud or harm the public.
              (e)  Obtaining a fee
as personal compensation or gain from a person on fraudulent representation of a
disease or injury condition generally considered incurable by competent medical
authority in the light of current scientific knowledge and practice can be cured
or offering, undertaking, attempting or agreeing to cure or treat the same by a
secret method, which he refuses to divulge to the board upon request.
              (f)  Use of any false,
fraudulent or forged statement or document, or the use of any fraudulent, deceitful,
dishonest or immoral practice in connection with any of the licensing requirements,
including the signing in his professional capacity any certificate that is known
to be false at the time he makes or signs such certificate.
              (g)  Failing to identify
a physician's school of practice in all professional uses of his name by use of
his earned degree or a description of his school of practice.
          (9)  The refusal of a licensing
authority of another state or jurisdiction to issue or renew a license, permit or
certificate to practice medicine in that jurisdiction or the revocation, suspension
or other restriction imposed on a license, permit or certificate issued by such
licensing authority which prevents or restricts practice in that jurisdiction, a
certified copy of the disciplinary order or action taken by the other state or jurisdiction
being prima facie evidence thereof, notwithstanding the pendency of any appeal.
          (10)  Surrender of a license
or authorization to practice medicine in another state or jurisdiction or surrender
of membership on any medical staff or in any medical or professional association
or society while under disciplinary investigation by any of those authorities or
bodies for acts or conduct similar to acts or conduct which would constitute grounds
for action as defined in this section.
          (11)  Final sanctions imposed
by the United States Department of Health and Human Services, Office of Inspector
General or any successor federal agency or office, based upon a finding of incompetency,
gross misconduct or failure to meet professionally recognized standards of health
care; a certified copy of the notice of final sanction being prima facie evidence
thereof.  As used in this paragraph, the term "final sanction" means the
written notice to a physician from the United States Department of Health and Human
Services, Officer of Inspector General or any successor federal agency or office,
which implements the exclusion.
          (12)  Failure to furnish
the board, its investigators or representatives information legally requested by
the board.
          (13)  Violation of any provision(s)
of the Medical Practice Act or the rules and regulations of the board or of any
order, stipulation or agreement with the board.
          (14)  Violation(s) of the
provisions of Sections 41-121-1 through 41-121-9 relating to deceptive advertisement
by health care practitioners.
          (15)  Performing or inducing
an abortion on a woman in violation of any provision of Sections 41-41-131 through
41-41-145.
          (16)  Performing an abortion
on a pregnant woman after determining that the unborn human individual that the
pregnant woman is carrying has a detectable fetal heartbeat as provided in Section
41-41-34.1.
          (17)  Violation(s) of
any provision of Sections 1 through 6 of this act.
     In addition to the grounds specified
above, the board shall be authorized to suspend the license of any licensee for
being out of compliance with an order for support, as defined in Section 93-11-153. 
The procedure for suspension of a license for being out of compliance with an order
for support, and the procedure for the reissuance or reinstatement of a license
suspended for that purpose, and the payment of any fees for the reissuance or reinstatement
of a license suspended for that purpose, shall be governed by Section 93-11-157
or 93-11-163, as the case may be.  If there is any conflict between any provision
of Section 93-11-157 or 93-11-163 and any provision of this chapter, the provisions
of Section 93-11-157 or 93-11-163, as the case may be, shall control. 
     A physician who provides a written
certification as authorized under the Mississippi Medical Cannabis Act and in compliance
with rules and regulations adopted thereunder shall not be subject to any disciplinary
action under this section solely due to providing the written certification.
     SECTION 12.  Section
83-9-22, Mississippi Code of 1972, is amended as follows:
     83-9-22.  (1)  (a)  Notwithstanding
any other provision of the law to the contrary, except as otherwise provided in
subsections (3) and (4) of this section, no health coverage plan shall
restrict coverage for medically appropriate treatment prescribed by a physician
and agreed to by a fully informed insured, or if the insured lacks legal capacity
to consent by a person who has legal authority to consent on his or her behalf,
based on an insured's diagnosis with a terminal condition.  Refusing to pay for
treatment rendered to an insured near the end of life that is consistent with best
practices for treatment of a disease or condition, approved uses of a drug or device,
or uses supported by peer reviewed medical literature, is a per se violation of
this section.
          (b)  Violations of this
section shall constitute an unfair trade practice and subject the violator to the
penalties provided by law.
          (c)  As used in this section
"terminal condition" means any aggressive malignancy, chronic end-stage
cardiovascular or cerebral vascular disease, or any other disease, illness or condition
which a physician diagnoses as terminal.
          (d)  As used in this section,
a "health coverage plan" shall mean any hospital, health or medical expense
insurance policy, hospital or medical service contract, employee welfare benefit
plan, contract or agreement with a health maintenance organization or a preferred
provider organization, health and accident insurance policy, or any other insurance
contract of this type, including a group insurance plan and the State Health and
Life Insurance Plan.
     (2)  (a)  Notwithstanding any
other provision of the law to the contrary, no health benefit paid directly or indirectly
with state funds, specifically Medicaid, shall restrict coverage for medically appropriate
treatment prescribed by a physician and agreed to by a fully informed individual,
or if the individual lacks legal capacity to consent by a person who has legal authority
to consent on his or her behalf, based on an individual's diagnosis with a terminal
condition.
          (b)  Refusing to pay for
treatment rendered to an individual near the end of life that is consistent with
best practices for treatment of a disease or condition, approved uses of a drug
or device, or uses supported by peer reviewed medical literature, is a per se violation
of this section.
          (c)  As used in this section
"terminal condition" means any aggressive malignancy, chronic end-stage
cardiovascular or cerebral vascular disease, or any other disease, illness or condition
which a physician diagnoses as terminal. 
     (3)  This section does not require
a health coverage plan to cover and pay for the treatment of a person who is a cardholder
and registered qualifying patient with medical cannabis that is lawful under the
Mississippi Medical Cannabis Act and in compliance with rules and regulations adopted
thereunder.
     (4)  This section does not
require a health coverage plan to provide coverage for gender transition
procedures for a person under twenty-one (21) years of age.  As used in this
section, the term "gender transition procedures" means the same as
defined in Section 3 of this act.
     SECTION 13.  The
following shall be codified as Section 83-9-37, Mississippi Code of 1972:
     83-9-37.  (1)  As
used in this section, the term "gender transition procedures" means
the same as defined in Section 3 of this act.
     (2)  A health benefit plan
under an insurance policy or other plan providing health care coverage in this
state shall not include reimbursement for gender transition procedures for a person
under twenty-one (21) years of age.
     (3)  A health benefit plan
under an insurance policy or other plan providing health care coverage in this
state is not required to provide coverage for gender transition procedures for
a person under twenty-one (21) years of age.
     SECTION 14.  Section
11-46-5, Mississippi Code of 1972, is amended as follows:
     11-46-5.  (1) 
Notwithstanding the immunity granted in Section 11-46-3, or the provisions of
any other law to the contrary, the immunity of the state and its political
subdivisions from claims for money damages arising out of the torts of such
governmental entities and the torts of their employees while acting within the
course and scope of their employment is hereby waived from and after July 1,
1993, as to the state, and from and after October 1, 1993, as to political subdivisions;
provided, however, immunity of a governmental entity in any such case shall be
waived only to the extent of the maximum amount of liability provided for in
Section 11-46-15.
     (2)  For the purposes of
this chapter an employee shall not be considered as acting within the course and
scope of his employment and a governmental entity shall not be liable or be
considered to have waived immunity for any conduct of its employee if the
employee's conduct constituted fraud, malice, libel, slander, defamation or any
criminal offense other than traffic violations.
     (3)  For the purposes of
this chapter and not otherwise, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that any
act or omission of an employee within the time and at the place of his
employment is within the course and scope of his employment, except for actions
described in subsection (2) of Section 73-25-33 and subsection (5) of this section.
     (4)  Nothing contained in
this chapter shall be construed to waive the immunity of the state from suit in
federal courts guaranteed by the Eleventh Amendment to the Constitution of the
United States.
     (5)  For purposes of this
chapter, an employee shall not be considered as acting within the course and
scope of his or her employment and a governmental entity shall be liable or be considered
to have waived immunity for any conduct of its employee if the employee's
conduct constituted a violation of subsection (1) of Section 2 of this act.
     SECTION 15.  Section
11-1-60, Mississippi Code of 1972, is amended as follows:
     11-1-60.  (1) 
For the purposes of this section, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings ascribed herein unless the context clearly requires otherwise:
          (a)  "Noneconomic
damages" means subjective, nonpecuniary damages arising from death, pain,
suffering, inconvenience, mental anguish, worry, emotional distress, loss of
society and companionship, loss of consortium, bystander injury, physical
impairment, disfigurement, injury to reputation, humiliation, embarrassment,
loss of the enjoyment of life, hedonic damages, other nonpecuniary damages, and
any other theory of damages such as fear of loss, illness or injury.  The term "noneconomic
damages" shall not include punitive or exemplary damages.
          (b)  "Actual
economic damages" means objectively verifiable pecuniary damages arising
from medical expenses and medical care, rehabilitation services, custodial
care, disabilities, loss of earnings and earning capacity, loss of income,
burial costs, loss of use of property, costs of repair or replacement of
property, costs of obtaining substitute domestic services, loss of employment,
loss of business or employment opportunities, and other objectively verifiable
monetary losses.
     (2)  (a)  In any cause of
action filed on or after September 1, 2004, for injury based on malpractice or
breach of standard of care against a provider of health care, including institutions
for the aged or infirm, in the event the trier of fact finds the defendant
liable, they shall not award the plaintiff more than Five Hundred Thousand
Dollars ($500,000.00) for noneconomic damages.
          (b)  In any civil
action filed on or after September 1, 2004, other than those actions described
in paragraph (a) of this subsection, in the event the trier of fact finds the
defendant liable, they shall not award the plaintiff more than One Million
Dollars ($1,000,000.00) for noneconomic damages.
     It is the intent of this
section to limit all noneconomic damages to the above.
          (c)  The trier of fact
shall not be advised of the limitations imposed by this subsection (2) and the
judge shall appropriately reduce any award of noneconomic damages that exceeds the
applicable limitation.
     (3)  Nothing contained in
subsection (1) of this section shall be construed as creating a cause of action
or as setting forth elements of or types of damages that are or are not
recoverable in any type of cause of action.
     (4)  The statutory limits
provided in this section shall not be applied in favor of any provider of healthcare
who violates subsection (1) of Section 2 of this act for any claim that arises or
is brought on or after July 1, 2023.
     SECTION 16.  This act
shall take effect and be in force from and after July 1, 2023.







MISSISSIPPI LEGISLATURE
2023 Regular Session
To: Judiciary, Division A
By: Senator(s) Hill, DeLano, Tate, Seymour, Whaley, Chism,
Younger, Fillingane, Caughman, Moran, McCaughn, Suber, Barrett, Branning,
Carter, McLendon, Williams, England, Chassaniol, DeBar, Thompson, Michel,
Sojourner, McDaniel, Blackwell
Senate Bill 2760
AN ACT TO ENACT THE MISSISSIPPI HELP NOT HARM ACT; TO CREATE
NEW SECTION 11-77-1, MISSISSIPPI CODE OF 1972, TO DEFINE TERMS; TO CREATE NEW
SECTION 11-77-3, MISSISSIPPI CODE OF 1972, TO PROHIBIT ANY PERSON FROM KNOWINGLY
PERFORMING OR PROVIDING GENDER REASSIGNMENT SURGERY OR SERVICES TO A MINOR; TO PROHIBIT
ANY PERSON FROM KNOWINGLY ENGAGING IN CONDUCT THAT AIDS OR ABETS IN GENDER REASSIGNMENT
SURGERY OR SERVICES BEING PERFORMED ON OR PROVIDED TO A MINOR; TO PROVIDE THAT ANY
LICENSED MEDICAL PROFESSIONAL, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, A PHYSICIAN,
OSTEOPATH, PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT, NURSE PRACTITIONER OR NURSE WHO PERFORMS OR
PROVIDES GENDER REASSIGNMENT SURGERY OR SERVICES TO A MINOR SHALL HAVE THEIR
LICENSE REVOKED; TO PROVIDE A PRIVATE CAUSE OF ACTION AGAINST A PHYSICIAN,
OSTEOPATH, HOSPITAL, PRESCRIBING CAREGIVER, CLINIC OR ANY OTHER HEALTH CARE
FACILITY FOR INJURIES ARISING OUT OF THE COURSE OF MEDICAL, SURGICAL OR OTHER
PROFESSIONAL SERVICES RELATED TO THE PERFORMANCE OF GENDER REASSIGNMENT SURGERY
OR SERVICES; TO PROVIDE THAT THIS CLAIM MUST BE BROUGHT WITHIN 30 YEARS FROM
THE DATE THE ALLEGED ACT OCCURRED; TO PROVIDE THAT THE ATTORNEY GENERAL MAY BRING
AN ACTION TO ENFORCE COMPLIANCE WITH THE ACT; TO PROVIDE CERTAIN EXCEPTIONS OF THE
ACT; TO AMEND SECTION 73-25-29, MISSISSIPPI CODE OF 1972, TO CONFORM TO THE PROVISIONS
OF THIS ACT; TO AMEND SECTION 73-25-33, MISSISSIPPI CODE OF 1972, TO REVISE PHYSICIAN'S
SCOPE OF PRACTICE TO PROVIDE THAT THE PRACTICE OF MEDICINE SHALL NOT MEAN TO KNOWINGLY
PROVIDE GENDER REASSIGNMENT SURGERY OR SERVICES FOR MINORS; TO AMEND SECTION 11-46-5,
MISSISSIPPI CODE OF 1972, TO ESTABLISH THAT AN EMPLOYEE SHALL NOT BE CONSIDERED
AS ACTING WITHIN THE COURSE AND SCOPE OF HIS EMPLOYMENT AND A GOVERNMENTAL
ENTITY MAY BE LIABLE OR BE CONSIDERED TO HAVE WAIVED IMMUNITY FOR ANY CONDUCT
OF ITS EMPLOYEE IF THE EMPLOYEE'S CONDUCT VIOLATED THE PROVISIONS OF THIS ACT; TO
CREATE NEW SECTION 43-13-117.7, MISSISSIPPI CODE OF 1972, TO PROHIBIT THE DIVISION
OF MEDICAID FROM REIMBURSING ANY ENTITY FOR PART OR ALL OF THE COSTS OF CARE
AND SERVICES RENDERED FOR GENDER REASSIGNMENT SURGERY OR SERVICES; TO CREATE
NEW SECTION 83-9-401, MISSISSIPPI CODE OF 1972, TO PROHIBIT HEALTH COVERAGE
PLANS THAT ARE FUNDED WHOLLY OR IN PART BY STATE FUNDS OR STATE-EMPLOYEE
CONTRIBUTIONS FROM REIMBURSING OR AUTHORIZING PAYMENT OF PART OR ALL OF THE
COSTS OF CARE AND SERVICES RENDERED BY ANY ENTITY FOR GENDER REASSIGNMENT
SURGERY OR SERVICES; TO AMEND SECTION 11-1-60, MISSISSIPPI CODE OF 1972, TO PROVIDE
THAT IN ANY CAUSE OF ACTION FILED ON OR AFTER JULY 1, 2023, FOR A CLAIM BROUGHT
UNDER SECTION 11-77-3, IN THE EVENT THE TRIER OF FACT FINDS THE DEFENDANT
LIABLE, THERE SHALL NOT BE A LIMITATION PLACED ON THE NONECONOMIC DAMAGES AWARD
THAT A TRIER OF FACT MAY AWARD TO THE PLAINTIFF; AND FOR RELATED PURPOSES.
     BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE
OF THE STATE OF MISSISSIPPI:
     SECTION 1.  This act shall
be known and may be cited as the "Mississippi Help Not Harm Act."
     SECTION 2.  The
following shall be codified as Section 11-77-1, Mississippi Code of 1972:
     11-77-1.  For
purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed
herein:
          (a)  "Sex"
means the biological indication of male and female in the context of
reproductive potential or capacity, such as sex chromosomes, naturally
occurring sex hormones, gonads and no ambiguous internal and external genitalia
present at birth, without regard to an individual's psychological, chosen or
subjective experience of gender.
          (b)  "Gender"
means the psychological, behavioral, social and cultural aspects of being male
or female.
          (c)  "Gender
reassignment surgery or services" means any of the following medical or
surgical services performed on an individual for the purpose of attempting to
alter the appearance of or affirm an individual's perception of his or her
gender or sex, if that appearance or perception is inconsistent with the
individual's sex:
               (i)  Prescribing
or administering puberty-blocking medication to stop or delay normal puberty;
               (ii)  Prescribing
or administering supraphysiologic doses of testosterone or other androgens to
females;
               (iii)  Prescribing
or administering supraphysiologic doses of estrogen to males;
               (iv)  Performing
surgeries that sterilize, including castration, vasectomy, hysterectomy,
oophorectomy, orchiectomy and penectomy; 
               (v)  Performing
surgeries that artificially construct tissue with the appearance of genitalia
that differs from the individual's sex, including metoidioplasty, phalloplasty
and vaginoplasty; or
               (vi)  Removing any
healthy or nondiseased body part or tissue, except for a male circumcision.
     SECTION 3.  The
following shall be codified as Section 11-77-3, Mississippi Code of 1972:
     11-77-3.  (1)  No person
shall knowingly perform or provide gender reassignment surgery or services to a
minor.  
     (2)  No person shall
knowingly engage in conduct that aids or abets in gender reassignment surgery
or services being performed on or provided to a minor.  This section may not be
construed to impose liability on any speech or conduct protected by federal or
state law.
     (3)  Any licensed medical professional,
including, but not limited to, a physician, osteopath, physician assistant, nurse
practitioner or nurse, who violates the prohibition in subsection (1) or (2) of
this section shall have his or her license in the State of Mississippi revoked pursuant
to action taken by their respective licensing board.
     (4)  For any claim accruing on
or after July 1, 2023, a private cause of action may be brought against a physician,
osteopath, hospital, prescribing caregiver, clinic and any other health care facility
for injuries arising out of the course of medical, surgical or other professional
services related to the performance of gender reassignment surgery or services.
 
     (5)  For any claim accruing on
or after July 1, 2023, no claim as provided for in subsection (4) of this section
may be brought unless it is filed within thirty (30) years from the date the alleged
act occurred.
     (6)  The Attorney General
may bring an action to enforce compliance with this section.  Nothing in this
section shall be construed to deny, impair or otherwise affect any right or
authority of the Attorney General, the state, or any agency, officer or
employee of the state to institute or intervene in any proceeding.
     (7)  This section shall not
apply to:
          (a)  Services provided
to individuals born with a medically verifiable disorder of sex development,
including a person with external sex characteristics that are irresolvably
ambiguous, such as an individual born with 46, XX chromosomes with
virilization, 46, XY chromosomes with undervirilization, or having both ovarian
and testicular tissue;
          (b)  Services provided
to an individual when a physician has otherwise diagnosed a disorder of sexual
development, in which the physician has determined through genetic or
biochemical testing that the individual does not have normal sex chromosome
structure, sex steroid hormone production or sex steroid hormone action for a
biological male or biological female; 
          (c)  The treatment of
any infection, injury, disease or disorder that has been caused or exacerbated
by the performance of gender transition procedures, whether or not the
procedures were performed in accordance with state and federal law; or 
          (d)  Any procedure
undertaken because an individual suffers from a physical disorder, physical
injury or physical illness that is certified by a physician and that would
place the individual in imminent danger of death or impairment of major bodily
function unless surgery is performed.
     SECTION 4.  Section
73-25-29, Mississippi Code of 1972, is amended as follows:
     73-25-29.  The grounds for the
nonissuance, suspension, revocation or restriction of a license or the denial of
reinstatement or renewal of a license are:
          (1)  Habitual personal use
of narcotic drugs, or any other drug having addiction-forming or addiction-sustaining
liability.
          (2)  Habitual use of intoxicating
liquors, or any beverage, to an extent which affects professional competency.
          (3)  Administering, dispensing
or prescribing any narcotic drug, or any other drug having addiction-forming or
addiction-sustaining liability otherwise than in the course of legitimate professional
practice.
          (4)  Conviction of violation
of any federal or state law regulating the possession, distribution or use of any
narcotic drug or any drug considered a controlled substance under state or federal
law, a certified copy of the conviction order or judgment rendered by the trial
court being prima facie evidence thereof, notwithstanding the pendency of any appeal.
          (5)  Procuring, or attempting
to procure, or aiding in, an abortion that is not medically indicated.
          (6)  Conviction of a felony
or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, a certified copy of the conviction order
or judgment rendered by the trial court being prima facie evidence thereof, notwithstanding
the pendency of any appeal.
          (7)  Obtaining or attempting
to obtain a license by fraud or deception.
          (8)  Unprofessional conduct,
which includes, but is not limited to:
              (a)  Practicing medicine
under a false or assumed name or impersonating another practitioner, living or dead.
              (b)  Knowingly performing
any act which in any way assists an unlicensed person to practice medicine.
               (c)  Making or willfully
causing to be made any flamboyant claims concerning the licensee's professional
excellence.
              (d)  Being guilty of
any dishonorable or unethical conduct likely to deceive, defraud or harm the public.
              (e)  Obtaining a fee
as personal compensation or gain from a person on fraudulent representation of a
disease or injury condition generally considered incurable by competent medical
authority in the light of current scientific knowledge and practice can be cured
or offering, undertaking, attempting or agreeing to cure or treat the same by a
secret method, which he refuses to divulge to the board upon request.
              (f)  Use of any false,
fraudulent or forged statement or document, or the use of any fraudulent, deceitful,
dishonest or immoral practice in connection with any of the licensing requirements,
including the signing in his professional capacity any certificate that is known
to be false at the time he makes or signs such certificate.
              (g)  Failing to identify
a physician's school of practice in all professional uses of his name by use of
his earned degree or a description of his school of practice.
          (9)  The refusal of a licensing
authority of another state or jurisdiction to issue or renew a license, permit or
certificate to practice medicine in that jurisdiction or the revocation, suspension
or other restriction imposed on a license, permit or certificate issued by such
licensing authority which prevents or restricts practice in that jurisdiction, a
certified copy of the disciplinary order or action taken by the other state or jurisdiction
being prima facie evidence thereof, notwithstanding the pendency of any appeal.
          (10)  Surrender of a license
or authorization to practice medicine in another state or jurisdiction or surrender
of membership on any medical staff or in any medical or professional association
or society while under disciplinary investigation by any of those authorities or
bodies for acts or conduct similar to acts or conduct which would constitute grounds
for action as defined in this section.
          (11)  Final sanctions imposed
by the United States Department of Health and Human Services, Office of Inspector
General or any successor federal agency or office, based upon a finding of incompetency,
gross misconduct or failure to meet professionally recognized standards of health
care; a certified copy of the notice of final sanction being prima facie evidence
thereof.  As used in this paragraph, the term "final sanction" means the
written notice to a physician from the United States Department of Health and Human
Services, Officer of Inspector General or any successor federal agency or office,
which implements the exclusion.
          (12)  Failure to furnish
the board, its investigators or representatives information legally requested by
the board.
          (13)  Violation of any provision(s)
of the Medical Practice Act or the rules and regulations of the board or of any
order, stipulation or agreement with the board.
          (14)  Violation(s) of the
provisions of Sections 41-121-1 through 41-121-9 relating to deceptive advertisement
by health care practitioners.
          (15)  Performing or inducing
an abortion on a woman in violation of any provision of Sections 41-41-131 through
41-41-145.
          (16)  Performing an abortion
on a pregnant woman after determining that the unborn human individual that the
pregnant woman is carrying has a detectable fetal heartbeat as provided in Section
41-41-34.1.
          (17)  Knowingly performing
gender reassignment surgery or services on a minor as prohibited in Section 11-77-3.
     In addition to the grounds specified
above, the board shall be authorized to suspend the license of any licensee for
being out of compliance with an order for support, as defined in Section 93-11-153.
 The procedure for suspension of a license for being out of compliance with an order
for support, and the procedure for the reissuance or reinstatement of a license
suspended for that purpose, and the payment of any fees for the reissuance or reinstatement
of a license suspended for that purpose, shall be governed by Section 93-11-157
or 93-11-163, as the case may be.  If there is any conflict between any provision
of Section 93-11-157 or 93-11-163 and any provision of this chapter, the provisions
of Section 93-11-157 or 93-11-163, as the case may be, shall control. 
     A physician who provides a written
certification as authorized under the Mississippi Medical Cannabis Act and in compliance
with rules and regulations adopted thereunder shall not be subject to any disciplinary
action under this section solely due to providing the written certification.
     SECTION 5.  Section
73-25-33, Mississippi Code of 1972, is amended as follows:
     73-25-33.  (1)  The
practice of medicine shall mean to suggest, recommend, prescribe, or direct for
the use of any person, any drug, medicine, appliance, or other agency, whether material
or not material, for the cure, relief, or palliation of any ailment or disease
of the mind or body, or for the cure or relief of any wound or fracture or
other bodily injury or deformity, or the practice of obstetrics or midwifery,
after having received, or with the intent of receiving therefor, either
directly or indirectly, any bonus, gift, profit or compensation; provided, that
nothing in this section shall apply to females engaged solely in the practice
of midwifery.
     (2)  The practice of
medicine shall not mean to knowingly provide gender reassignment surgery or services
for minors.
     (3)  For purposes of this
section, gender reassignment surgery or services means the services or activities
prohibited under Section 11-77-3.
     SECTION 6.  Section
11-46-5, Mississippi Code of 1972, is amended as follows:
     11-46-5.  (1) 
Notwithstanding the immunity granted in Section 11-46-3, or the provisions of
any other law to the contrary, the immunity of the state and its political
subdivisions from claims for money damages arising out of the torts of such
governmental entities and the torts of their employees while acting within the
course and scope of their employment is hereby waived from and after July 1,
1993, as to the state, and from and after October 1, 1993, as to political
subdivisions; provided, however, immunity of a governmental entity in any such
case shall be waived only to the extent of the maximum amount of liability
provided for in Section 11-46-15.
     (2)  For the purposes of
this chapter an employee shall not be considered as acting within the course and
scope of his employment and a governmental entity shall not be liable or be
considered to have waived immunity for any conduct of its employee if the employee's
conduct constituted fraud, malice, libel, slander, defamation or any criminal
offense other than traffic violations.
     (3)  For the purposes of
this chapter and not otherwise, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that any
act or omission of an employee within the time and at the place of his
employment is within the course and scope of his employment, except for actions
described in Section 73-25-33(2) and subsection (5) of this section.
     (4)  Nothing contained in
this chapter shall be construed to waive the immunity of the state from suit in
federal courts guaranteed by the Eleventh Amendment to the Constitution of the
United States.
     (5)  For the purposes of
this chapter, an employee shall not be considered as acting within the course and
scope of his employment, and a governmental entity may be liable and be
considered to have waived immunity for any conduct of its employee if the
employee's conduct constituted an act in violation of Section 11-77-3.
     SECTION 7.  The
following shall be codified as Section 43-13-117.7, Mississippi Code of 1972:
     43-13-117.7.  (1)  For
purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed herein:
          (a)  "Sex" means
the biological indication of male and female in the context of reproductive potential
or capacity, such as sex chromosomes, naturally occurring sex hormones, gonads and
nonambiguous internal and external genitalia present at birth, without regard to
an individual's psychological, chosen or subjective experience of gender.
          (b)  "Gender"
means the psychological, behavioral, social and cultural aspects of being male or
female.
          (c)  "Gender
reassignment surgery or services" means any of the following medical or
surgical services performed on an individual for the purpose of attempting to
alter the appearance of or affirm an individual's perception of his or her
gender or sex, if that appearance or perception is inconsistent with the
individual's sex:
               (i)  Prescribing
or administering puberty-blocking medication to stop or delay normal puberty;
               (ii)  Prescribing
or administering supraphysiologic doses of testosterone or other androgens to
females;
               (iii)  Prescribing
or administering supraphysiologic doses of estrogen to males;
               (iv)  Performing
surgeries that sterilize, including castration, vasectomy, hysterectomy,
oophorectomy, orchiectomy and penectomy; 
               (v)  Performing
surgeries that artificially construct tissue with the appearance of genitalia
that differs from the individual's sex, including metoidioplasty, phalloplasty
and vaginoplasty; or
               (vi)  Removing any
healthy or nondiseased body part or tissue, except for a male circumcision.
     (2)  The division shall not authorize
payment of part or all of the costs of care and services rendered by any entity
for gender reassignment surgery or services.
     SECTION 8.  The
following shall be codified as Section 83-9-401, Mississippi Code of 1972:
     83-9-401.  (1)  For purposes
of this section, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed herein:
          (a)  "Sex" means
the biological indication of male and female in the context of reproductive potential
or capacity, such as sex chromosomes, naturally occurring sex hormones, gonads and
nonambiguous internal and external genitalia present at birth, without regard to
an individual's psychological, chosen or subjective experience of gender.
          (b)  "Gender"
means the psychological, behavioral, social and cultural aspects of being male or
female.
          (c)  "Gender
reassignment surgery or services" means any of the following medical or surgical
services performed on an individual for the purpose of attempting to alter the
appearance of or affirm an individual's perception of his or her gender or sex,
if that appearance or perception is inconsistent with the individual's sex:
               (i)  Prescribing
or administering puberty-blocking medication to stop or delay normal puberty;
               (ii)  Prescribing
or administering supraphysiologic doses of testosterone or other androgens to
females;
               (iii)  Prescribing
or administering supraphysiologic doses of estrogen to males;
               (iv)  Performing
surgeries that sterilize, including castration, vasectomy, hysterectomy,
oophorectomy, orchiectomy and penectomy; 
               (v)  Performing
surgeries that artificially construct tissue with the appearance of genitalia
that differs from the individual's sex, including metoidioplasty, phalloplasty
and vaginoplasty; or
               (vi)  Removing any
healthy or nondiseased body part or tissue, except for a male circumcision.
          (d)  "Health coverage
plan" shall mean any health or medical expense insurance policy, hospital or
medical service contract, employee welfare benefit plan, contract or agreement with
a health maintenance organization or a preferred provider organization, health and
accident insurance policy, including a group insurance plan and the State Health
Plan.
     (2)  No health coverage plan
that is funded wholly or in part by state funds or state-employee contributions
shall reimburse or authorize payment of part or all of the costs of care and services
rendered by any entity for gender reassignment surgery or services.
     SECTION 9.  Section
11-1-60, Mississippi Code of 1972, is amended as follows:
     11-1-60.  (1) 
For the purposes of this section, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings ascribed herein unless the context clearly requires otherwise:
          (a)  "Noneconomic
damages" means subjective, nonpecuniary damages arising from death, pain,
suffering, inconvenience, mental anguish, worry, emotional distress, loss of
society and companionship, loss of consortium, bystander injury, physical
impairment, disfigurement, injury to reputation, humiliation, embarrassment,
loss of the enjoyment of life, hedonic damages, other nonpecuniary damages, and
any other theory of damages such as fear of loss, illness or injury.  The term "noneconomic
damages" shall not include punitive or exemplary damages.
          (b)  "Actual
economic damages" means objectively verifiable pecuniary damages arising
from medical expenses and medical care, rehabilitation services, custodial
care, disabilities, loss of earnings and earning capacity, loss of income,
burial costs, loss of use of property, costs of repair or replacement of
property, costs of obtaining substitute domestic services, loss of employment,
loss of business or employment opportunities, and other objectively verifiable
monetary losses.
     (2)  (a)  In any cause of
action filed on or after September 1, 2004, for injury based on malpractice or
breach of standard of care against a provider of health care, including
institutions for the aged or infirm, in the event the trier of fact finds the
defendant liable, they shall not award the plaintiff more than Five Hundred
Thousand Dollars ($500,000.00) for noneconomic damages.
          (b)  In any civil
action filed on or after September 1, 2004, other than those actions described
in paragraph (a) of this subsection, in the event the trier of fact finds the
defendant liable, they shall not award the plaintiff more than One Million
Dollars ($1,000,000.00) for noneconomic damages.
     It is the intent of this section
to limit all noneconomic damages to the above.
          (c)  The trier of fact
shall not be advised of the limitations imposed by this subsection (2) and the
judge shall appropriately reduce any award of noneconomic damages that exceeds
the applicable limitation.
     (3)  Nothing contained in
subsection (1) of this section shall be construed as creating a cause of action
or as setting forth elements of or types of damages that are or are not
recoverable in any type of cause of action.
     (4)  For any claim accruing
on or after July 1, 2023, subsections (1) through (3) of this section shall not
apply to a claim brought according to Section 11-77-3 against a provider of
health care for injuries arising out of the course of medical, surgical or other
professional services related to the performance of gender reassignment surgery
or services.  In any cause of action filed on or after July 1, 2023, for a claim
brought according to Section 11-77-3, in the event the trier of fact finds the
defendant liable, there shall not be a limitation placed on the noneconomic damages
award that a trier of fact may award to the plaintiff.
     SECTION 10.  This act
shall take effect and be in force from and after July 1, 2023.






 
 
 



REFERENCE TITLE: gender transition;
  prohibitions; hormone therapies




 
 
 
 
State of
  Arizona
Senate
Fifty-sixth
  Legislature
First Regular
  Session
2023
 
 
 




SB 1702




 




Introduced by 
Senator Wadsack: Representatives Jones, McGarr
 



 
 
 
 
 
 
 
An Act
 
amending
section 32-3230, Arizona Revised Statutes; relating to health
professionals.
 
 
(TEXT OF BILL BEGINS ON NEXT PAGE)
 




Be it enacted by the Legislature of the State of Arizona:
Section 1. Section 32-3230, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:
START_STATUTE32-3230. Prohibition of permanent gender reassignment surgery for minors;
prohibition on referring for or providing hormone therapy for minors;
definitions
A. A physician may not provide irreversible PERMANENT gender reassignment surgery to any individual who is
under eighteen years of age. A health professional may not make
a referral for or provide cross-sex hormones or puberty-blocking
drugs to any individual who is under eighteen years of age.
B. A physician may provide any of the following to
an individual who is under eighteen years of age: 
1. Services to an individual born with a medically verifiable
disorder of sex development, including an individual with external biological
sex characteristics that are irresolvably ambiguous, such as being born with
forty-six XX chromosomes with virilization or forty-six
XY chromosomes with undervirilization or having both ovarian and
testicular tissue.
2. Services provided when a
physician has otherwise diagnosed a disorder of sexual development and has
determined through genetic or biochemical testing that the individual does not
have normal sex chromosome structure, sex steroid hormone production or sex
steroid hormone action.
3. The treatment of any infection, injury, disease
or disorder that has been caused by or exacerbated by the performance of gender
transition procedures, whether or not the gender transition procedure was
performed in accordance with state and federal law. 
4. Any procedure undertaken because the individual
suffers from a physical disorder, physical injury or physical illness that
would, as certified by a physician, place the individual in imminent danger of
death or impairment of major bodily function unless surgery is performed. 
C. For the purposes of this section:
1. "Biological sex" means the biological
indication of male and female in the context of reproductive potential or
capacity, such as sex chromosomes, naturally occurring sex hormones, gonads and
nonambiguous internal and external genitalia present at birth, without regard
to an individual's psychological, chosen or subjective experience of gender.
2. "Cross-sex
hormones" means either of the following: 
(a) Testosterone
or other androgens given to biological females in amounts that are larger or
more potent than would normally occur naturally in healthy biological sex
females.
(b) Estrogen
given to biological males in amounts that are larger or more potent than would
normally occur naturally in healthy biological sex males.
2. 3. "Gender"
means the psychological, behavioral, social and cultural aspects of being male
or female.
3. 4. "Gender
transition" means the process in which a person goes from identifying with
and living as a gender that corresponds to the person's biological sex to
identifying with and living as a gender different from the person's biological
sex and may involve social, legal or physical changes.
4. 5. "Irreversible PERMANENT gender reassignment
surgery" means a medical procedure performed for the purpose of assisting
an individual with a gender transition, including any of the following:
(a) Penectomy, orchiectomy, vaginoplasty,
clitoroplasty or vulvoplasty for biologically male patients or hysterectomy or
ovariectomy for biologically female patients.
(b) Metoidioplasty, phalloplasty, vaginectomy,
scrotoplasty or implantation of erection or testicular prostheses for biologically
female patients.
(c) Augmentation mammoplasty for biologically male
patients and subcutaneous mastectomy for female patients.
5. 6. "Physician"
means a person who is licensed pursuant to chapter 13 or 17 of this title.
7. "Puberty-blocking drugs"
means either of the following when used to delay or suppress pubertal
development in children for the purpose of assisting an individual with a
gender transition: 
(a) Gonadotropin-releasing
hormone analogues or other synthetic drugs used in biological sex males to stop
luteinizing hormone secretion and testosterone secretion.
(b) Synthetic
drugs used in biological sex females to stop the production of estrogens and
progesterone. END_STATUTE
Sec. 2. Effective date;
purpose
A. This act is effective from and after March 31,
2024.
B. The effective date of this act is delayed so that
minors in this state who are currently using puberty-blocking drugs or
cross-sex hormones have time for appropriate medication tapering and
discontinuation under the care of the minor's physician or other health
professional.







2023-2024 Bill 234 Text of Previous Version (Dec. 02, 2022) - South Carolina Legislature Online
 

South Carolina General Assembly125th Session, 2023-2024Bill 234Indicates Matter StrickenIndicates New Matter(Text matches printed bills. Document has been reformatted to meet World Wide Web specifications.)








A bill

to amend the South Carolina Code of Laws, TITLE 63, BY ADDING CHAPTER 23 so as TO ENACT THE PARENTAL BILL OF RIGHTS; by adding Section 63-23-110 so as to provide that parents have fundamental rights regarding the upbringing, education, and care of their children; by adding Section 63-23-120 so as to define necessary terms; by adding Section 63-23-130 so as to provide that the government cannot infringe on fundamental rights of parents without a compelling state interest that is narrowly tailored and that cannot be achieved by a less intrusive means; by adding Section 63-23-140 so as to provide fundamental rights of parents; by adding Section 63-23-150 so as to require that school districts should create parental involvement policies; by adding Section 63-23-160 so as to prohibit health care providers from soliciting or providing health care services to children without written parental consent; by adding Section 63-23-170 to provide that the provisions contained in this chapter supersede any matter to the contrary contained in a state of emergency; by adding Section 63-23-180 to provide for a cause of action for violations of this chapter; and by amending Section 63-5-340, relating to Minor's consent to health services, so as to raise the age at which a minor may consent to health services.

Be it enacted by the General Assembly of the State of South Carolina:

SECTION 1.	Title 63 of the S.C. Code is amended by adding:

	Chapter 23

	Parental Bill of Rights

	Section 63-23-110.	The General Assembly finds that:
	(1) parents have a fundamental right to direct the upbringing, education, and care of their children;
	(2) important information relating to a child should not be withheld, either inadvertently or purposefully, from his or her parent, including information relating to the child's health, well-being, and education, while the child is in the custody of the school district; and
	(3) it is necessary to establish a consistent mechanism for parents to be notified of information relating to the health and well-being of their children.

	Section 63-23-120.	For purposes of this chapter:
	(1) “Child” means a person under the age of eighteen.
	(2) “Health care provider” means a physician, advanced practice registered nurse, or physician assistant licensed to practice in this State pursuant to Articles 1 and 7, Chapter 47, Title 40 and Article 1, Chapter 33, Title 40, respectively.
	(3) “Instructional materials” means any textbooks or other instructional material adopted by the State Board of Education or a local school district or school, and may include other materials used in the classroom, including workbooks and worksheets, handouts, software, applications, and any digital media made available to students.
	(4) “Parent” means a biological parent, adoptive parent, legal guardian, or other person with legal custody of a child.

	Section 63-23-130.	The State, political subdivisions of the State, public school districts, other governmental entities, and other institutions shall not infringe on the fundamental rights of a parent to direct the upbringing, education, health care, and mental health care of his or her child without demonstrating that the action is reasonable and necessary to achieve a compelling state interest as applied to the parent and child; narrowly tailored to achieve the compelling state interest; and not otherwise served by a less restrictive means.

	Section 63-23-140.	(A) All parental rights are reserved to the parent of a child in this State without obstruction or interference from the State, political subdivisions of the State, public school districts, other governmental entities, or other institutions, including:
		(1) the right to direct the education and care of his or her child;
		(2) the right to direct the upbringing and the moral or religious training of his or her child;
		(3) the right to apply to enroll his or her child in a public school or, as an alternative to public education, a private school, including a religious school, a home education program, or other available options, as authorized by law;
		(4) the right to access and review all school records relating to his or her child;
		(5) the right to make physical and mental health care decisions for his or her child, unless otherwise prohibited by court order;
		(6) the right to access and review all medical records of his or her child, unless prohibited by court order or if the parent is the subject of an investigation of a crime committed against the child and a law enforcement agency or official requests that the information not be released;
		(7) the right to consent in writing before a biometric scan of his or her child is made, shared, or stored;
		(8) the right to consent in writing before any record of his or her child's blood or deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) is created, stored, or shared, except as authorized pursuant to a court order;
		(9) the right to consent in writing before the State, a political subdivision of the State, or a public school district or public school makes a video or voice recording of his or her child unless the recording is made during or as part of a court proceeding or is made as part of a forensic interview in a criminal or Department of Social Services investigation or is to be used solely for:
			(a) security or surveillance of buildings or grounds; or
			(b) a photo identification card; and
		(10) the right to be notified promptly if an employee of the State, a political subdivision of the State, a public school district or public school, another governmental entity, or another institution suspects that abuse, neglect, or a criminal offense has been committed against his or her child, unless the incident has first been reported to law enforcement or the Department of Social Services and notifying the parent would impede the investigation.
	(B) This section does not:
		(1) authorize a parent of a child in this State to engage in conduct that constitutes child abuse or neglect as defined in Section 63-7-20 in violation of State law;
		(2) condone, authorize, approve, or apply to a parental action or decision that would end life; or
		(3) prohibit a court of competent jurisdiction from issuing an order that is otherwise permitted by law.
	(C) An employee of the State, a political subdivision of the State, a public school district, or another governmental entity shall not encourage or coerce, or attempt to encourage or coerce, a child to withhold information from his or her parent, nor shall any such employee withhold from a child’s parent information that is relevant to the physical, emotional, or mental health of the child.
	(D) A parent of a child in this State has inalienable rights that are more comprehensive than those listed in this chapter unless the rights have been legally waived or terminated. This chapter does not prescribe all rights to a parent of a child in this State. Unless required by law, the rights of a parent of a child in this State may not be limited or denied. 

	Section 63-23-150.	(A) In addition to the requirements of Chapter 28, Title 59, each district school board shall, in consultation with parents, teachers, and administrators, develop and adopt a policy to promote parental involvement in the public school system. The policy must include:
		(1) a plan for parental participation in schools to improve parent and teacher cooperation in such areas as homework, school attendance, and discipline;
		(2) a procedure for a parent to learn about his or her child's course of study, including the source of any supplemental educational materials;
		(3) procedures for a parent to object to a specific educational activity, instructional materials and other materials used in the classroom and for a parent to withdraw the child from the specific activity, class, or program where the objectional material or activity is used. Such objections may be based on beliefs regarding morality, sex, and religion or the belief that such materials are harmful;
		(4) procedures for a parent to withdraw his or her child from any portion of the school district's comprehensive health education program required pursuant to Chapter 32, Title 59 that relates to sex education or instruction in acquired immune deficiency syndrome education or any instruction regarding sexuality if the parent provides a written objection to his or her child's participation. The procedures must provide for a parent to be notified at least seven days in advance of such course content so that he or she may withdraw his or her child from those portions of the course. Instruction regarding sexuality includes curriculum that has the goal or purpose of studying, exploring, or informing students about gender roles or stereotypes, gender identity, gender expression, sexual orientation, or romantic or sexual relationships;
		(5) procedures for a parent to learn about the nature and purpose of clubs and activities offered at his or her child's school, including those that are extracurricular or part of the school curriculum, and for the parent to withdraw his or her child from any club or activity that the parent objects to the child’s participation;
		(6) procedures for a parent to learn about parental rights and responsibilities under general law, including all of the following:
			(a) the right to receive prior notice and to opt his or her child out of any portion of the school district's comprehensive health education required pursuant to Chapter 32, Title 59 that relates to sex education instruction in acquired immune deficiency syndrome education or any instruction regarding sexuality;
			(b) the right to opt his or her child out of any specific activity, class, or program where an objectionable activity or material is used;
			(c) a plan to disseminate information about school choice options, including open enrollment;
			(d) in accordance with Section 44-29-180, the right of a parent to exempt his or her child from immunizations;
			(e) the right of a parent to review statewide, standardized assessment results;
			(f) the right of a parent to enroll his or her child in gifted or special education programs;
			(g) the right of a parent to inspect school district instructional materials;
			(h) the right of a parent to access information relating to the school district's policies for promotion or retention, including high school graduation requirements;
			(i) the right of a parent to receive a school report card and be informed of his or her child's attendance requirements;
			(j) the right of a parent to access information relating to the state public education system, state standards, report card requirements, attendance requirements, and instructional material requirements;
			(k) the right of a parent to participate in parent-teacher associations and organizations that are sanctioned by a district school board or the State Department of Education;
			(l) the right of a parent to opt out of any district-level data collection relating to his or her child not required by law; and
			(m) the right to be excused from school attendance for religious purposes.
	(B) A district school board may provide the information required in this section electronically or post such information on its website.
	(C) A parent may request, in writing, from the school district superintendent the information required under this section. Within ten days, the school district superintendent must provide the information to the parent. If the school district superintendent denies a parent's request for information or does not respond to the parent's request within ten days, the parent may appeal the denial to the district school board. The district school board must place a parent's appeal on the agenda for its next public meeting. If it is too late for a parent's appeal to appear on the next agenda, the appeal must be included on the agenda for the subsequent meeting.

	Section 63-23-160.	(A) Except as otherwise provided by court order, a health care provider may not provide or solicit or arrange to provide health care services, perform a physical or psychological examination, or prescribe medicinal drugs or biologics to a child without first obtaining written parental consent.
	(B) Except as otherwise provided by court order, a health care provider shall not allow a medical procedure to be performed on a child in its facility without first obtaining written parental consent.
	(C) This section does not apply to an abortion, which is governed by Chapter 41, Title 44.
	(D) This section does not apply when a medical emergency exists that requires a person to perform a medical service to prevent imminent and irreparable serious injury to or save the life of a child.
	(E) A health care practitioner or other person who violates this section is:
		(1) subject to disciplinary action by the relevant professional licensing board; and
		(2) guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of one thousand dollars, not more than thirty days in jail, or both.

	Section 63-23-170.	The provisions of this chapter apply notwithstanding any conflicting temporary provision in a declaration of a state of emergency by the Governor or a health care state of emergency declared by the Department of Health and Environmental Control.

	Section 63-23-180.	(A) Any parent may raise a violation of this chapter in state or federal court or before an administrative tribunal of appropriate jurisdiction as a claim or a defense.
	(B) Any parent claiming violation of any provisions of this chapter may bring an action for injunctive relief and damages against the state or any of its political subdivisions, including, without limitation, any school board, school district, or school administrative unit, any other governmental entity, the parent claims has violated this chapter, and if the court finds in favor of the parent, it may award to the parent his or her reasonable attorneys’ fees and court costs, including attorneys’ fees and court costs on appeal to the state’s supreme court.

SECTION 2.	Section 63-5-340 of the S.C. Code is amended to read:

	Section 63-5-340.	Any minor who has reached the age of sixteen eighteen years may consent to any health services from a person authorized by law to render the particular health service for himself and the consent of no other person shall be necessary unless such involves an operation which shall be performed only if such is essential to the health or life of such child in the opinion of the performing physician and a consultant physician if one is available.

SECTION 3.	This act takes effect upon approval by the Governor.
XX
----XX----This web page was last updated on December 02, 2022 at 10:28 AM





 
88R618 EAS-D


 


 

		By: Toth
H.B. No. 122




 


 



 		
			

A BILL TO BE ENTITLED




 
			

AN ACT




 
			
relating to professional liability insurance coverage for and 



 
			
prohibitions on providing to certain children procedures and 



 
			
treatments for gender transitioning, gender reassignment, or 



 
			
gender dysphoria; creating a criminal offense.



 
			
       BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF TEXAS:



 
			
       SECTION 1.  Chapter 161, Health and Safety Code, is amended 



 
			
by adding Subchapter X to read as follows:



 
			
SUBCHAPTER X.  GENDER TRANSITIONING AND GENDER REASSIGNMENT 



 
			
PROCEDURES AND TREATMENTS FOR CERTAIN CHILDREN



 
			
       Sec. 161.701.  DEFINITIONS.  In this subchapter:



 
			
             (1)  "Child" means an individual who is younger than 18 



 
			
years of age.



 
			
             (2)  "Health care provider" means a person other than a 



 
			
physician who is licensed, certified, or otherwise authorized by 



 
			
this state's laws to provide or render health care or to dispense or 



 
			
prescribe a prescription drug in the ordinary course of business or 



 
			
practice of a profession.



 
			
             (3)  "Physician" means a person licensed to practice 



 
			
medicine in this state.



 
			
       Sec. 161.702.  PROHIBITED PROVISION OF GENDER TRANSITIONING 



 
			
OR GENDER REASSIGNMENT PROCEDURES AND TREATMENTS TO CERTAIN 



 
			
CHILDREN.  For the purpose of transitioning a child's biological 



 
			
sex as determined by the sex organs, chromosomes, and endogenous 



 
			
profiles of the child or affirming the child's perception of the 



 
			
child's sex if that perception is inconsistent with the child's 



 
			
biological sex, a physician or health care provider may not:



 
			
             (1)  perform a surgery that sterilizes the child, 



 
			
including:



 
			
                   (A)  castration;



 
			
                   (B)  vasectomy;



 
			
                   (C)  hysterectomy;



 
			
                   (D)  oophorectomy;



 
			
                   (E)  metoidioplasty;



 
			
                   (F)  orchiectomy;



 
			
                   (G)  penectomy;



 
			
                   (H)  phalloplasty; and



 
			
                   (I)  vaginoplasty;



 
			
             (2)  perform a mastectomy;



 
			
             (3)  provide, administer, prescribe, or dispense any of 



 
			
the following prescription drugs that induce transient or permanent 



 
			
infertility:



 
			
                   (A)  puberty suppression or blocking prescription 



 
			
drugs to stop or delay normal puberty;



 
			
                   (B)  supraphysiologic doses of testosterone to 



 
			
females; or



 
			
                   (C)  supraphysiologic doses of estrogen to males; 



 
			
or



 
			
             (4)  remove any otherwise healthy or non-diseased body 



 
			
part or tissue.



 
			
       Sec. 161.703.  EXCEPTIONS.  Section 161.702 does not apply 



 
			
to the provision by a physician or health care provider, with the 



 
			
consent of the child's parent or legal guardian, of appropriate and 



 
			
medically necessary gender transitioning or gender reassignment 



 
			
procedures or treatments to a child who:



 
			
             (1)  is born with a medically verifiable genetic 



 
			
disorder of sex development, including:



 
			
                   (A)  46,XX chromosomes with virilization;



 
			
                   (B)  46,XY chromosomes with undervirilization; or



 
			
                   (C)  both ovarian and testicular tissue; or



 
			
             (2)  does not have the normal sex chromosome structure 



 
			
for male or female as determined by a physician through genetic 



 
			
testing.



 
			
       Sec. 161.704.  CRIMINAL PENALTY.  (a)  A physician or health 



 
			
care provider commits an offense if the physician or health care 



 
			
provider violates a provision of this subchapter.



 
			
       (b)  An offense under this section is a felony of the second 



 
			
degree.



 
			
       SECTION 2.  Subchapter F, Chapter 1901, Insurance Code, is 



 
			
amended by adding Section 1901.256 to read as follows:



 
			
       Sec. 1901.256.  PROHIBITED COVERAGE FOR PROVISION OF CERTAIN 



 
			
GENDER-RELATED PROCEDURES AND TREATMENTS TO CERTAIN CHILDREN.  A 



 
			
professional liability insurance policy issued to a physician or 



 
			
health care provider may not include coverage for damages assessed 



 
			
against the physician or health care provider who provides to a 



 
			
child gender transitioning or gender reassignment procedures or 



 
			
treatments that are prohibited by Section 161.702, Health and 



 
			
Safety Code.



 
			
       SECTION 3.  Section 164.052, Occupations Code, is amended by 



 
			
amending Subsection (a) and adding Subsection (d) to read as 



 
			
follows:



 
			
       (a)  A physician or an applicant for a license to practice 



 
			
medicine commits a prohibited practice if that person:



 
			
             (1)  submits to the board a false or misleading 



 
			
statement, document, or certificate in an application for a 



 
			
license;



 
			
             (2)  presents to the board a license, certificate, or 



 
			
diploma that was illegally or fraudulently obtained;



 
			
             (3)  commits fraud or deception in taking or passing an 



 
			
examination;



 
			
             (4)  uses alcohol or drugs in an intemperate manner 



 
			
that, in the board's opinion, could endanger a patient's life;



 
			
             (5)  commits unprofessional or dishonorable conduct 



 
			
that is likely to deceive or defraud the public, as provided by 



 
			
Section 164.053, or injure the public;



 
			
             (6)  uses an advertising statement that is false, 



 
			
misleading, or deceptive;



 
			
             (7)  advertises professional superiority or the 



 
			
performance of professional service in a superior manner if that 



 
			
advertising is not readily subject to verification;



 
			
             (8)  purchases, sells, barters, or uses, or offers to 



 
			
purchase, sell, barter, or use, a medical degree, license, 



 
			
certificate, or diploma, or a transcript of a license, certificate, 



 
			
or diploma in or incident to an application to the board for a 



 
			
license to practice medicine;



 
			
             (9)  alters, with fraudulent intent, a medical license, 



 
			
certificate, or diploma, or a transcript of a medical license, 



 
			
certificate, or diploma;



 
			
             (10)  uses a medical license, certificate, or diploma, 



 
			
or a transcript of a medical license, certificate, or diploma that 



 
			
has been:



 
			
                   (A)  fraudulently purchased or issued;



 
			
                   (B)  counterfeited; or



 
			
                   (C)  materially altered;



 
			
             (11)  impersonates or acts as proxy for another person 



 
			
in an examination required by this subtitle for a medical license;



 
			
             (12)  engages in conduct that subverts or attempts to 



 
			
subvert an examination process required by this subtitle for a 



 
			
medical license;



 
			
             (13)  impersonates a physician or permits another to 



 
			
use the person's license or certificate to practice medicine in 



 
			
this state;



 
			
             (14)  directly or indirectly employs a person whose 



 
			
license to practice medicine has been suspended, canceled, or 



 
			
revoked;



 
			
             (15)  associates in the practice of medicine with a 



 
			
person:



 
			
                   (A)  whose license to practice medicine has been 



 
			
suspended, canceled, or revoked; or



 
			
                   (B)  who has been convicted of the unlawful 



 
			
practice of medicine in this state or elsewhere;



 
			
             (16)  performs or procures a criminal abortion, aids or 



 
			
abets in the procuring of a criminal abortion, attempts to perform 



 
			
or procure a criminal abortion, or attempts to aid or abet the 



 
			
performance or procurement of a criminal abortion;



 
			
             (17)  directly or indirectly aids or abets the practice 



 
			
of medicine by a person, partnership, association, or corporation 



 
			
that is not licensed to practice medicine by the board;



 
			
             (18)  performs an abortion on a woman who is pregnant 



 
			
with a viable unborn child during the third trimester of the 



 
			
pregnancy unless:



 
			
                   (A)  the abortion is necessary to prevent the 



 
			
death of the woman;



 
			
                   (B)  the viable unborn child has a severe, 



 
			
irreversible brain impairment; or



 
			
                   (C)  the woman is diagnosed with a significant 



 
			
likelihood of suffering imminent severe, irreversible brain damage 



 
			
or imminent severe, irreversible paralysis;



 
			
             (19)  performs an abortion on an unemancipated minor 



 
			
without the written consent of the child's parent, managing 



 
			
conservator, or legal guardian or without a court order, as 



 
			
provided by Section 33.003 or 33.004, Family Code, unless the 



 
			
abortion is necessary due to a medical emergency, as defined by 



 
			
Section 171.002, Health and Safety Code;



 
			
             (20)  otherwise performs an abortion on an 



 
			
unemancipated minor in violation of Chapter 33, Family Code;



 
			
             (21)  performs or induces or attempts to perform or 



 
			
induce an abortion in violation of Subchapter C, F, or G, Chapter 



 
			
171, Health and Safety Code;



 
			
             (22)  in complying with the procedures outlined in 



 
			
Sections 166.045 and 166.046, Health and Safety Code, wilfully 



 
			
fails to make a reasonable effort to transfer a patient to a 



 
			
physician who is willing to comply with a directive; [or]



 
			
             (23)  performs or delegates to another individual the 



 
			
performance of a pelvic examination on an anesthetized or 



 
			
unconscious patient in violation of Section 167A.002, Health and 



 
			
Safety Code; or



 
			
             (24)  to facilitate the gender transition or treat the 



 
			
gender dysphoria of an unemancipated minor:



 
			
                   (A)  provides, administers, prescribes, or 



 
			
dispenses a puberty suppression or blocking prescription drug or 



 
			
cross-sex hormone to the minor, including by writing a false or 



 
			
fictitious prescription; or



 
			
                   (B)  performs or attempts to perform a surgical 



 
			
intervention on the minor.



 
			
       (d)  Notwithstanding Subsection (a)(24), a physician or 



 
			
applicant for a license to practice medicine does not commit a 



 
			
prohibited practice if the physician or applicant provides a 



 
			
puberty suppression or blocking prescription drug to an 



 
			
unemancipated minor for the purpose of normalizing puberty for a 



 
			
minor experiencing precocious puberty.



 
			
       SECTION 4.  Section 1901.256, Insurance Code, as added by 



 
			
this Act, applies only to a medical professional liability 



 
			
insurance policy that is delivered, issued for delivery, or renewed 



 
			
on or after January 1, 2024.  An insurance policy that is delivered, 



 
			
issued for delivery, or renewed before January 1, 2024, is governed 



 
			
by the law in effect immediately before the effective date of this 



 
			
Act, and that law is continued in effect for that purpose.



 
			
       SECTION 5.  Section 164.052, Occupations Code, as amended by 



 
			
this Act, applies only to conduct that occurs on or after the 



 
			
effective date of this Act. Conduct that occurs before the 



 
			
effective date of this Act is governed by the law in effect on the 



 
			
date the conduct occurred, and the former law is continued in effect 



 
			
for that purpose.



 
			
       SECTION 6.  This Act takes effect September 1, 2023.





Senate
File
335
-
Introduced


SENATE
FILE
335


BY
WESTRICH


A
BILL
FOR


An
Act
prohibiting
persons
from
entering
single
and
multiple
1


occupancy
toilet
facilities
and
other
facilities
in
2


elementary
and
secondary
schools
that
do
not
correspond
with
3


the
person’s
biological
sex
and
including
effective
date
4


provisions.
5


BE
IT
ENACTED
BY
THE
GENERAL
ASSEMBLY
OF
THE
STATE
OF
IOWA:
6


TLSB
1978XS
(2)
90


cm/jh




S.F.
335


Section
1.
NEW
SECTION
.
216.9A
Single
and
multiple
1


occupancy
toilet
facilities
in
schools
——
use
by
persons
of
same
2


biological
sex.
3


It
shall
not
be
an
unfair
or
discriminatory
practice
for
4


a
school
to
require
a
single
or
multiple
occupancy
toilet
5


facility
to
be
designated
only
for
and
used
by
persons
of
6


the
same
biological
sex
as
provided
in
section
279.77.
It
7


shall
not
be
an
unfair
or
discriminatory
practice
to
prohibit
8


a
person
from
using
a
single
or
multiple
occupancy
toilet
9


facility
that
does
not
correspond
with
the
person’s
biological
10


sex
as
provided
in
section
279.77.
11


Sec.
2.
NEW
SECTION


.
279.77
Single
and
multiple
occupancy
12


toilet
facilities
——
use
by
persons
of
same
biological
sex.
13


1.
As
used
in
this
section:
14


a.
“Multiple
occupancy
toilet
facility”
means
a
toilet
15


facility
designed
or
designated
to
be
used
by
more
than
one
16


person
at
a
time.
17


b.
“School”
means
an
attendance
center
operated
by
a
school
18


district.
19


c.
“Sex”
means
the
biological
sex
designation
of
female
20


or
male
on
a
person’s
birth
certificate,
characterized
by
21


reproductive
anatomy
and
chromosomes.
22


d.
“Single
occupancy
toilet
facility”
means
a
toilet
facility
23


designed
or
designated
to
be
used
by
only
one
person
at
a
time.
24


2.
A
school
shall
require
a
multiple
occupancy
toilet
25


facility
to
be
designated
only
for
and
used
by
persons
of
the
26


same
sex.
A
person
shall
not
enter
a
school
multiple
occupancy
27


toilet
facility,
or
a
single
occupancy
toilet
facility
28


designated
only
for
persons
of
the
same
sex,
that
does
not
29


correspond
with
the
person’s
sex.
30


3.
In
any
other
school
facility,
a
facility
used
for
31


overnight
accommodations
or
other
setting
not
specified
in
32


subsection
2
where
a
student
may
be
in
a
state
of
undress
in
33


the
presence
of
other
students,
school
personnel
shall
provide
34


separate,
private
areas
designated
for
use
by
students
based
on
35


-1-


LSB
1978XS
(2)
90


cm/jh


1/
4






S.F.
335


the
students’
sex.
1


4.
Students
who,
for
any
reason,
desire
greater
privacy
when
2


using
a
multiple
occupancy
toilet
facility,
a
single
occupancy
3


toilet
facility,
or
other
facility
described
in
subsection
3,
4


and
whose
parent
or
legal
guardian
provides
written
consent
5


to
school
officials,
may
submit
a
request
to
such
officials
6


for
access
to
alternative
facilities.
The
school
official
to
7


whom
a
request
is
submitted
shall
evaluate
such
request
and
8


shall,
to
the
extent
reasonable,
offer
options
for
alternative
9


facilities.
In
no
event
shall
any
accommodation
be
made
that
10


includes
access
to
a
student
multiple
occupancy
toilet
facility
11


or
a
single
occupancy
toilet
facility
designated
for
use
by
12


students
of
the
opposite
sex
while
students
of
the
opposite
sex
13


are
present
or
could
be
present.
Reasonable
accommodations
14


include
all
of
the
following:
15


a.
Access
to
a
single
occupancy
toilet
facility.
16


b.
Access
to
a
unisex
single
occupancy
toilet
facility
by
17


only
one
student
at
a
time.
18


c.
Controlled
use
of
faculty
multiple
occupancy
toilet
19


facility
or
a
single
occupancy
toilet
facility.
20


5.
This
section
shall
not
be
construed
to
prohibit
a
school
21


from
doing
any
of
the
following:
22


a.
Adopting
policies
necessary
to
accommodate
disabled
23


persons
or
young
children
in
need
of
physical
assistance
when
24


using
a
multiple
occupancy
toilet
facility,
a
single
occupancy
25


toilet
facility,
or
other
facility
described
in
subsection
3.
26


b.
Permitting
access
to
a
multiple
occupancy
toilet
27


facility,
a
single
occupancy
toilet
facility,
or
other
facility
28


described
in
subsection
3
for
custodial
or
maintenance
purposes
29


when
such
facility
is
not
occupied
by
a
member
of
the
opposite
30


sex.


31


c.
Rendering
medical
assistance.
32


d.
Permitting
access
to
a
multiple
occupancy
toilet
33


facility,
a
single
occupancy
toilet
facility,
or
other
facility
34


described
in
subsection
3
during
a
natural
disaster,
emergency,
35


-2-


LSB
1978XS
(2)
90


cm/jh


2/
4




S.F.
335


or
when
necessary
to
prevent
a
serious
threat
to
good
order
or
1


student
safety.
2


6.
a.
A
citizen
of
this
state
may
file
a
complaint
with
the
3


office
of
the
attorney
general
that
a
school
is
in
violation
4


of
the
provisions
of
this
section
if
all
of
the
following
are
5


true:
6


(1)
The
citizen
provides
written
notice
to
the
school
7


describing
the
violation.
8


(2)
The
school
does
not
cure
the
violation
within
three
9


business
days
after
receiving
written
notice
of
the
violation.
10


b.
A
complaint
filed
pursuant
to
this
section
shall
include
11


all
of
the
following:
12


(1)
A
copy
of
the
written
notice
delivered
to
the
school.
13


(2)
A
signed
statement
by
the
citizen
describing
the
14


violation
and
stating
that
notice
was
provided.
15


c.
Upon
receipt
of
a
complaint,
the
attorney
general
shall
16


investigate
the
violation
described
in
the
complaint.
If
the
17


attorney
general
determines
that
no
violation
occurred
or
that
18


no
further
legal
action
is
warranted,
then
the
attorney
general
19


shall
send
written
notice
of
such
determination
to
the
citizen
20


who
filed
the
complaint
and
to
the
school.
If
the
attorney
21


general
determines
that
legal
action
is
warranted
to
cure
the
22


violation,
then
the
attorney
general
may
file
an
action
in
a
23


court
of
competent
jurisdiction
seeking
such
equitable
relief
24


as
the
attorney
general
deems
appropriate.
25


d.
This
subsection
shall
not
limit
other
remedies
at
law
or
26


equity
available
to
the
aggrieved
person
against
the
school.
27


Sec.
3.
EFFECTIVE
DATE.
This
Act,
being
deemed
of
immediate
28


importance,
takes
effect
upon
enactment.
29


EXPLANATION
30


The
inclusion
of
this
explanation
does
not
constitute
agreement
with
31


the
explanation’s
substance
by
the
members
of
the
general
assembly.
32


This
bill
requires
elementary
and
secondary
public
schools
33


to
designate
and
allow
the
use
of
multiple
occupancy
toilet
34


facilities
only
by
persons
of
the
same
biological
sex.
The
35


-3-


LSB
1978XS
(2)
90


cm/jh


3/
4




S.F.
335


bill
prohibits
a
person
from
entering
a
single
or
multiple
1


occupancy
toilet
facility
in
a
school
that
does
not
correspond
2


with
the
person’s
biological
sex.
The
bill
allows
schools
3


to
provide
alternative
facilities
upon
a
request
to
school
4


officials
for
alternative
facilities
from
the
parents
of
the
5


student.
6


The
bill
also
allows
any
citizen
of
the
state
to
file
a
7


complaint
of
violation
of
the
bill
with
the
attorney
general
8


if
the
citizen
provides
written
notice
to
the
public
school
9


describing
the
violation
and
the
public
school
does
not
cure
10


the
violation
within
three
business
days
after
receiving
11


written
notice.
The
complaint
filed
with
the
attorney
general
12


must
have
a
copy
of
the
written
notice
that
had
been
delivered
13


to
the
school
and
a
signed
statement
by
the
citizen
describing
14


the
violation.
The
attorney
general
is
required
to
investigate
15


the
claim
of
a
violation
and
pursue
legal
action
if
warranted.
16


The
bill
provides
that
such
designations
and
prohibitions
do
17


not
constitute
unfair
or
discriminatory
practices
in
violation
18


of
the
Iowa
civil
rights
Act,
Code
chapter
216.
19


-4-


LSB
1978XS
(2)
90


cm/jh


4/
4




 
 
 



REFERENCE TITLE: public schools;
  restrooms; reasonable accommodations




 
 
 
 
State of
  Arizona
Senate
Fifty-sixth
  Legislature
First Regular
  Session
2023
 
 
 




SB 1040




 




Introduced by 
Senator Kavanagh
 



 
 
 
 
 
An Act
 
amending
title 15, chapter 1, article 1, Arizona Revised Statutes, by adding section
15-120.04; relating to public schools
 
 
(TEXT OF BILL BEGINS ON NEXT PAGE)
 




Be it enacted by the Legislature of the State of Arizona:
Section 1. Title 15, chapter 1, article 1,
Arizona Revised Statutes, is amended by adding section 15-120.04, to read:
START_STATUTE15-120.04. Public schools; reasonable accommodations; restrooms; changing
facilities; sleeping quarters; cause of action; definitions
A. A public school shall provide a
reasonable accommodation to any person who both:
1. For any reason, is unwilling or
unable to use either a multi-occupancy restroom or changing facility
designated for the person's sex and located in a public school building or
multi-occupancy sleeping quarters while attending a public school-sponsored
activity.
2. Requests in writing a reasonable
accommodation from the public school.
B. A reasonable accommodation may
include either of the following:
1. Access to a single-occupancy
restroom or changing facility.
2. Use of an employee restroom or
changing facility.
C. A reasonable accommodation does
not include access to a restroom or changing facility that is designated for
use by persons of the opposite sex while persons of the opposite sex are
present or could be present.
D. This section does not prohibit
public schools from adopting policies necessary to accommodate persons protected
under the Americans with disabilities act of 1990 (P.L. 101336; 104 Stat. 327)
or young children in need of physical assistance when using restrooms or
changing facilities located in public schools.
E. Any person whose written request
for a reasonable accommodation under this section is denied by the public
school has a private cause of action against the public school unless the
public school can demonstrate that the accommodation would cause an undue
hardship.
F. Any person who encounters a person
of the opposite sex in a multi-occupancy restroom or changing facility
designated for the person's sex and located in a public school building or who
is required by the public school to share sleeping quarters with a person of
the opposite sex, unless such persons are of the same family, has a private
cause of action against the public school if the public school gave the person
of the opposite sex permission to use the restroom, changing facility or
sleeping quarters. For the purposes of this subsection,
"family" means a person's spouse, parent or guardian, child, sibling
or grandparent. 
G. Any claims arising pursuant to
this section shall be brought in superior court in the county where either the
person resides or the public school is located at the time of filing.
H. All civil actions brought pursuant
to this section must be initiated within two years after the alleged violation
occurred.
I. Persons who are aggrieved under
this section and who prevail in court may recover monetary damages for all
psychological, emotional and physical harm suffered.
J. Persons who prevail on a claim
brought pursuant to this section are entitled to recover reasonable attorney
fees and costs.
K. This section does not limit other
remedies at law or equity that are available to the aggrieved person against
the public school.
L. For the purposes of this section:
1. "Changing Facility":
(a) Means a
facility in which a person may be in a state of undress in the presence of
others.
(b) Includes a
locker room, changing room or shower room.
2. "Restroom" means a
facility that includes one or more toilets or urinals.
3. "Sex" means a person's
immutable biological sex as determined by anatomy and genetics existing at the
time of the person's birth. Evidence of a person's biological sex includes any
government-issued identification document that accurately reflects the person's
sex as listed on the person's original birth certificate. END_STATUTE
Sec. 2. Short title
This act may be cited as the "Arizona Accommodations for
All Children Act".



 
 
 



REFERENCE TITLE: public monies;
  ideology training; prohibition




 
 
 
 
State of
  Arizona
Senate
Fifty-sixth
  Legislature
First Regular
  Session
2023
 
 
 




SB 1694




 




Introduced by 
Senators Hoffman: Borrelli, Kern, Wadsack; Representatives Heap,
  Jones, McGarr
 



 
 
 
 
 
 
 
An Act
 
amending
title 35, chapter 2, Arizona Revised Statutes, by adding article 4; relating to
public monies.
 
 
(TEXT OF BILL BEGINS ON NEXT PAGE)
 




Be it enacted by the Legislature of the State of Arizona:
Section 1. Title
35, chapter 2, Arizona Revised Statutes, is amended by adding article 4, to
read:
ARTICLE 4. PROHIBITED EXPENDITURE OF PUBLIC
MONIES
START_STATUTE35-351. Prohibited expenditure of public monies; diversity: equity;
inclusion; cause of action; definitions
A. A public entity shall not:
1. REQUIRE AN EMPLOYEE TO ENGAGE IN a
DIVERSITY, EQUITY AND INCLUSION PROGRAM.
2. sPEND PUBLIC MONIES ON a
DIVERSITY, EQUITY AND INCLUSION PROGRAM.
3. eNTER INTO OR RENEW A CONTRACT
with A company THAT PARTICIPATES IN a DIVERSITY, EQUITY AND INCLUSION PROGRAM.
4. spend public monies to acquire
services, supplies, information technology or goods for a DIVERSITY, EQUITY AND
INCLUSION PROGRAM.
5. ESTABLISH, SUPPORT, SUSTAIN OR
EMPLOY AN office or INDIVIDUAL WHOse DUTIES INCLUDE COORDINATING, CREATING,
DEVELOPING, DESIGNING, IMPLEMENTING, ORGANIZING, PLANNING OR PROMOTING DIVERSITY,
EQUITY AND INCLUSION PROGRAMS.
6. Except as required by federal law:
(a) ADVANCE OR
adopt ANY POLICY OR PROCEDURE DESIGNED TO INFLUENCE THE COMPOSITION OF its
workforce ON THE BASIS OF RACE, SEX OR COLOR.
(b) ADVANCE OR
adopt ANY POLICY OR PROCEDURE DESIGNED OR IMPLEMENTED ON THE BASIS OF RACE, SEX
OR COLOR.
7. promote or adopt any theory of
UNCONSCIOUS OR IMPLICIT BIAS, CULTURAL APPROPRIATION, ALLYSHIP, TRANSGENDERISM,
MICROAGGRESSIONS, MICROINVALIDATION, GROUP MARGINALIZATION, ANTI-RACISM,
SYSTEMIC OPPRESSION, ETHNOCENTRISM, STRUCTURAL RACISM OR INEQUITY, SOCIAL
JUSTICE, INTERSECTIONALITY, NEOPRONOUNS, INCLUSIVE LANGUAGE, HETERONORMATIVITY,
DISPARATE IMPACT, GENDER IDENTITY OR THEORY, RACIAL OR SEXUAL PRIVILEGE OR ANY
RELATED Theory as the official POSITION of the public entity.
b. an employee of a public entity who
is required to PARTICIPATE in a DIVERSITY, equity and inclusion progrAM may
bring an action against the public entity. If the employee
demonstrates that the public entity violated this section, the employee is
entitled to injunctive relief.
C. THIS SECTION DOES NOT PRECLUDE a
public entity from:
1. offering TRAINING ON SEXUAL
HARASSMENT.
2. OPERATINg AN OFFICE STAFFED BY, OR
employing, LICENSED ATTORNEYS AND LEGAL SUPPORT STAFF whose SOLE PURPOSE is
ENSURING COMPLIANCE WITH FEDERAL LAW OR AN APPLICABLE COURT ORDER.
D. For the purposes of this section:
1. "Diversity, equity and
inclusion program" means a program that requires an employee of a public
entity to participate in or attend a TRAINING, ORIENTATION, WORKSHOP, THERAPY
OR SIMILAR ACTIVITy THAT focuses on any of the following:
(a) dESCRIBing
OR EXPOSing STRUCTURES, SYSTEMS, RELATIONS OF POWER, PRIVILEGE OR SUBORDINATION
ON THE BASIS OF RACE, SEX, COLOR, GENDER, ETHNICITY,
GENDER IDENTITY OR SEXUAL ORIENTATION.
(b) DESCRIBing
METHODS TO IDENTIFY, DISMANTLE OR OPPOSE STRUCTURES, SYSTEMS, RELATIONS OF
POWER, PRIVILEGE OR SUBORDINATION ON THE BASIS OF RACE, SEX, COLOR, GENDER,
ETHNICITY, GENDER IDENTITY OR SEXUAL ORIENTATION.
(c) JUSTIFYING
DIFFERENTIAL TREATMENT OR BENEFIT ON THE BASIS OF SEX, COLOR, GENDER,
ETHNICITY, GENDER IDENTITY or SEXUAL ORIENTATION.
(d) ADVANCing
THEORIES OF UNCONSCIOUS OR IMPLICIT BIAS, CULTURAL APPROPRIATION, ALLYSHIP,
TRANSGENDERISM, MICROAGGRESSIONS, MICROINVALIDATION, GROUP MARGINALIZATION,
ANTI-RACISM, SYSTEMIC OPPRESSION, ETHNOCENTRISM, STRUCTURAL RACISM OR
INEQUITY, SOCIAL JUSTICE, INTERSECTIONALITY, NEOPRONOUNS, INCLUSIVE LANGUAGE,
HETERONORMATIVITY, DISPARATE IMPACT, GENDER IDENTITY OR THEORY, RACIAL OR
SEXUAL PRIVILEGE OR ANY CONCEPT SUBSTANTIALLY RELATED TO ANY OF THESE THEORIES.
2. "Public entity" Means:
(a) this state,
a political subdivision of this state or an agency, board, commission or
department of this state or a political subdivision of this state.
(b) Includes
the universities under the jurisdiction of the Arizona board of regents and
community college districts as defined in section 15-1401. END_STATUTE




 
88R9436 EAS-D


 


 

		By: Toth
H.B. No. 1952




 


 



 		
			

A BILL TO BE ENTITLED




 
			

AN ACT




 
			
relating to the required inclusion of a person's sex on a birth 



 
			
certificate.



 
			
       BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF TEXAS:



 
			
       SECTION 1.  Section 192.002, Health and Safety Code, is 



 
			
amended by adding Subsection (c-1) to read as follows:



 
			
       (c-1)  The form must include a space for recording the 



 
			
biological sex of a child as either male or female.  A child born 



 
			
with a Y chromosome must be classified as male and a child born 



 
			
without a Y chromosome must be classified as female.  The method of 



 
			
classifying a child's biological sex used under this section 



 
			
applies to other laws of this state with respect to the 



 
			
determination of a person's sex or gender. 



 
			
       SECTION 2.  As soon as practicable after the effective date 



 
			
of this Act, the executive commissioner of the Health and Human 



 
			
Services Commission shall adopt rules necessary to implement the 



 
			
changes in law made by this Act.



 
			
       SECTION 3.  This Act takes effect September 1, 2023.





 
88R2452 SRA-D


 


 

		By: Schatzline
H.B. No. 1266




 


 



 		
			

A BILL TO BE ENTITLED




 
			

AN ACT




 
			
relating to the definition of sexually oriented business.



 
			
       BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF TEXAS:



 
			
       SECTION 1.  Section 102.051, Business & Commerce Code, is 



 
			
amended to read as follows:



 
			
       Sec. 102.051.  DEFINITIONS.  In this subchapter:



 
			
             (1)  "Drag performance" has the meaning assigned by 



 
			
Section 243.002, Local Government Code.



 
			
             (1-a) "Nude" means:



 
			
                   (A)  entirely unclothed; or



 
			
                   (B)  clothed in a manner that leaves uncovered or 



 
			
visible through less than fully opaque clothing any portion of the 



 
			
breasts below the top of the areola of the breasts, if the person is 



 
			
female, or any portion of the genitals or buttocks.



 
			
             (2)  "Sexually oriented business" means a nightclub, 



 
			
bar, restaurant, or similar commercial enterprise that:



 
			
                   (A)  provides for an audience of two or more 



 
			
individuals:



 
			
                         (i)  live nude entertainment or live nude 



 
			
performances; or



 
			
                         (ii)  a drag performance; and



 
			
                   (B)  authorizes on-premises consumption of 



 
			
alcoholic beverages, regardless of whether the consumption of 



 
			
alcoholic beverages is under a license or permit issued under the 



 
			
Alcoholic Beverage Code.



 
			
       SECTION 2.  Section 243.002, Local Government Code, is 



 
			
amended to read as follows:



 
			
       Sec. 243.002.  DEFINITIONS [DEFINITION].  In this chapter:



 
			
             (1)  "Drag performance" means a performance in which a 



 
			
performer exhibits a gender identity that is different than the 



 
			
performer's gender assigned at birth using clothing, makeup, or 



 
			
other physical markers and sings, lip syncs, dances, or otherwise 



 
			
performs before an audience for entertainment.



 
			
             (2)  "Sexually [, "sexually] oriented business" means:



 
			
                   (A)  a sex parlor, nude studio, modeling studio, 



 
			
love parlor, adult bookstore, adult movie theater, adult video 



 
			
arcade, adult movie arcade, adult video store, adult motel, or 



 
			
other commercial enterprise the primary business of which is the 



 
			
offering of a service or the selling, renting, or exhibiting of 



 
			
devices or any other items intended to provide sexual stimulation 



 
			
or sexual gratification to the customer; or



 
			
                   (B)  a nightclub, bar, restaurant, or other 



 
			
commercial enterprise that provides for an audience of two or more 



 
			
individuals a drag performance.



 
			
       SECTION 3.  This Act takes effect September 1, 2023.





 
88R632 MCK-F


 


 

		By: Patterson
H.B. No. 436




 


 



 		
			

A BILL TO BE ENTITLED




 
			

AN ACT




 
			
relating to the definition of abuse of a child.



 
			
       BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF TEXAS:



 
			
       SECTION 1.  Section 261.001, Family Code, is amended by 



 
			
amending Subdivision (1) and adding Subdivision (3-a) to read as 



 
			
follows:



 
			
             (1)  "Abuse":



 
			
                   (A)  includes the following acts or omissions by a 



 
			
person:



 
			
                         (i) [(A)]  mental or emotional injury to a 



 
			
child that results in an observable and material impairment in the 



 
			
child's growth, development, or psychological functioning;



 
			
                         (ii) [(B)]  causing or permitting the child 



 
			
to be in a situation in which the child sustains a mental or 



 
			
emotional injury that results in an observable and material 



 
			
impairment in the child's growth, development, or psychological 



 
			
functioning;



 
			
                         (iii) [(C)]  physical injury that results in 



 
			
substantial harm to the child, or the genuine threat of substantial 



 
			
harm from physical injury to the child, including an injury that is 



 
			
at variance with the history or explanation given and excluding an 



 
			
accident or reasonable discipline by a parent, guardian, or 



 
			
managing or possessory conservator that does not expose the child 



 
			
to a substantial risk of harm;



 
			
                         (iv) [(D)]  failure to make a reasonable 



 
			
effort to prevent an action by another person that results in 



 
			
physical injury that results in substantial harm to the child;



 
			
                         (v) [(E)]  sexual conduct harmful to a 



 
			
child's mental, emotional, or physical welfare, including conduct 



 
			
that constitutes the offense of continuous sexual abuse of young 



 
			
child or disabled individual under Section 21.02, Penal Code, 



 
			
indecency with a child under Section 21.11, Penal Code, sexual 



 
			
assault under Section 22.011, Penal Code, or aggravated sexual 



 
			
assault under Section 22.021, Penal Code;



 
			
                         (vi) [(F)]  failure to make a reasonable 



 
			
effort to prevent sexual conduct harmful to a child;



 
			
                         (vii) [(G)]  compelling or encouraging the 



 
			
child to engage in sexual conduct as defined by Section 43.01, Penal 



 
			
Code, including compelling or encouraging the child in a manner 



 
			
that constitutes an offense of trafficking of persons under Section 



 
			
20A.02(a)(7) or (8), Penal Code, solicitation of prostitution under 



 
			
Section 43.021, Penal Code, or compelling prostitution under 



 
			
Section 43.05(a)(2), Penal Code;



 
			
                         (viii) [(H)]  causing, permitting, 



 
			
encouraging, engaging in, or allowing the photographing, filming, 



 
			
or depicting of the child if the person knew or should have known 



 
			
that the resulting photograph, film, or depiction of the child is 



 
			
obscene as defined by Section 43.21, Penal Code, or pornographic;



 
			
                         (ix) [(I)]  the current use by a person of a 



 
			
controlled substance as defined by Chapter 481, Health and Safety 



 
			
Code, in a manner or to the extent that the use results in physical, 



 
			
mental, or emotional injury to a child;



 
			
                         (x) [(J)]  causing, expressly permitting, 



 
			
or encouraging a child to use a controlled substance as defined by 



 
			
Chapter 481, Health and Safety Code;



 
			
                         (xi) [(K)]  causing, permitting, 



 
			
encouraging, engaging in, or allowing a sexual performance by a 



 
			
child as defined by Section 43.25, Penal Code;



 
			
                         (xii) [(L)]  knowingly causing, permitting, 



 
			
encouraging, engaging in, or allowing a child to be trafficked in a 



 
			
manner punishable as an offense under Section 20A.02(a)(5), (6), 



 
			
(7), or (8), Penal Code, or the failure to make a reasonable effort 



 
			
to prevent a child from being trafficked in a manner punishable as 



 
			
an offense under any of those sections; [or]



 
			
                         (xiii) [(M)]  forcing or coercing a child to 



 
			
enter into a marriage;



 
			
                         (xiv)  administering or supplying, or 



 
			
consenting to or assisting in the administration or supply of, a 



 
			
puberty suppression prescription drug or cross-sex hormone to a 



 
			
child, other than an intersex child, for the purpose of gender 



 
			
transitioning or gender reassignment; or



 
			
                         (xv)  performing or consenting to the 



 
			
performance of surgery or another medical procedure on a child, 



 
			
other than an intersex child, for the purpose of gender 



 
			
transitioning or gender reassignment; and



 
			
                   (B)  does not include an act described by 



 
			
Paragraph (A)(xiv) if the act is the dispensing or delivery of a 



 
			
drug in accordance with Subtitle J, Title 3, Occupations Code, by a 



 
			
person licensed under that subtitle.



 
			
             (3-a)  "Intersex child" means a child who is younger 



 
			
than 18 years of age and either:



 
			
                   (A)  has inborn chromosomal, gonadal, genital, or 



 
			
endocrine characteristics, or a combination of those 



 
			
characteristics, that are not suited to the typical definition of 



 
			
male or female or are atypical for the determined sex of the child; 



 
			
or



 
			
                   (B)  is considered by a medical professional to 



 
			
have inborn chromosomal, gonadal, genital, or endocrine 



 
			
characteristics that are ambiguous or atypical for the determined 



 
			
sex of the child.



 
			
       SECTION 2.  Section 71.004, Family Code, is amended to read 



 
			
as follows:



 
			
       Sec. 71.004.  FAMILY VIOLENCE.  "Family violence" means:



 
			
             (1)  an act by a member of a family or household against 



 
			
another member of the family or household that is intended to result 



 
			
in physical harm, bodily injury, assault, or sexual assault or that 



 
			
is a threat that reasonably places the member in fear of imminent 



 
			
physical harm, bodily injury, assault, or sexual assault, but does 



 
			
not include defensive measures to protect oneself;



 
			
             (2)  abuse, as that term is defined by Sections 



 
			
261.001(1)(A)(iii), (v), (vii), (viii), (ix), (x), (xi), and (xiii)



 
			
[261.001(1)(C), (E), (G), (H), (I), (J), (K), and (M)], by a member 



 
			
of a family or household toward a child of the family or household; 



 
			
or



 
			
             (3)  dating violence, as that term is defined by 



 
			
Section 71.0021.



 
			
       SECTION 3.  The changes in law made by this Act to Section 



 
			
261.001, Family Code, do not apply to a person alleged to have 



 
			
committed abuse with respect to a child who:



 
			
             (1)  was born on or before August 31, 2012; and



 
			
             (2)  before the effective date of this Act, under the 



 
			
care of a licensed physician began taking puberty suppressant 



 
			
prescription drugs or cross-sex hormones or had any surgery or 



 
			
medical procedure performed for the purpose of gender transitioning 



 
			
or gender reassignment.



 
			
       SECTION 4.  This Act takes effect September 1, 2023.




SENATE, No. 2648 

STATE OF NEW JERSEY
220th LEGISLATURE
  
INTRODUCED MAY 16, 2022
 




 
Sponsored by:
Senator  EDWARD DURR
District 3 (Cumberland, Gloucester and Salem)
 
 
 
 
SYNOPSIS
     Prohibits school districts from incorporating
instruction on sexual orientation or gender identity for students in grades
kindergarten through six; requires consent from parents or guardians for
students in grades seven through 12 for instruction on sexual orientation or
gender identity. 
 
CURRENT VERSION OF TEXT 
     As introduced.
   




An Act concerning public school curriculum and
supplementing chapter 35 of Title 18A of the New Jersey Statutes.
 
     Be It
Enacted by the Senate and General Assembly of
the State of New Jersey:
 
     1.    a.  A school district
shall not include, as part of a course of instruction, information on sexual
orientation or gender identity for students in grades kindergarten through six
as part of the school district's implementation of the New Jersey Student
Learning Standards.
     b.    A school district shall
not provide instruction for students in grades seven through 12 that includes
information on sexual orientation or gender identity without receiving prior
written consent from the student's parent or guardian.  Any student whose
parent or guardian does not provide prior written consent shall be excused from
that portion of the course where such instruction is provided and no penalties
as to credit or graduation shall result therefrom.
 
     2.    a.  A parent or guardian
whose child participated in a course of instruction that includes information
on sexual orientation or gender identity in violation of section 1 of this act may
bring a civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction for injunctive
relief.
     b.    If a school district or
employee of a school district knowingly violates the provisions of section 1 of
this act, the Office of the Attorney General may seek an injunction against the
school district or the employee of the school district.
 
     3.    The Commissioner of
Education may withhold State funds from a school district that knowingly
violates the provisions of section 1 of this act until the commissioner finds
that the school district is no longer in violation of this section.
 
     4.    This act shall take
effect immediately and shall first apply to the first full school year
following the date of enactment.
 
 
STATEMENT
 
     This bill prohibits school
districts from incorporating instruction on sexual orientation or gender
identity for students in grades kindergarten through six.  Under the bill, any
student in grades seven through 12 whose parent or guardian does not provide
prior written consent to participate in a course that includes information on
sexual orientation or gender identity will be excused from that portion of the course
without penalty.  
     Also under the bill, a parent
or guardian whose child participated in a course that includes information on
sexual orientation or gender identity in grades kindergarten through six, or
grades seven through 12 without prior written consent, may bring a civil action
in any court of competent jurisdiction for injunctive relief.  If a school
district or employee of a school district knowingly violates the provisions of
this section, the Office of the Attorney General may seek an injunction against
the school district or the employee of the school district.  The Commissioner
of Education may withhold State funds from a school district that knowingly
violates the provisions of this bill.







2023-2024 Bill 276 Text of Previous Version (Dec. 07, 2022) - South Carolina Legislature Online
 

South Carolina General Assembly125th Session, 2023-2024Bill 276Indicates Matter StrickenIndicates New Matter(Text matches printed bills. Document has been reformatted to meet World Wide Web specifications.)








A joint Resolution

proposing an amendment to article XVII of the constitution of south carolina, by adding section 16 to provide that a person's biological sex at birth constitutes that person's gender for the purposes of the state constitution and laws.

Be it enacted by the General Assembly of the State of South Carolina:

SECTION 1. It is proposed that Article XVII of the Constitution of this State be amended by adding:

Section 16. The biological indication of male or female in the context of reproductive potential or capacity, such as sex chromosomes, naturally occurring sex hormones, gonads, and nonambiguous internal and external genitalia present at birth, without regard to an individual's psychological, chosen, or subjective experience of gender shall constitute a person's gender for the purposes of this constitution and the laws of this State.

SECTION 2.The proposed amendment must be submitted to the qualified electors at the next general election for representatives.  Ballots must be provided at the various voting precincts with the following words printed or written on the ballot:

"Must Section Article XVII of the Constitution of this State, relating to Miscellaneous Matters be amended so as to provide the biological sex of a person at birth shall constitute the gender of that person for the purposes of the S.C. Constitution and the laws of this State?

Yeso
Noo

Those voting in favor of the question shall deposit a ballot with a check or cross mark in the square after the word 'Yes', and those voting against the question shall deposit a ballot with a check or cross mark in the square after the word 'No'."

----XX----
This web page was last updated on December 07, 2022 at 02:29 PM



<![endif]-->




HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES


H.B. NO.


291




THIRTY-SECOND LEGISLATURE, 2023


 




STATE OF HAWAII


 




 


 




 




 
 



A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO CERTIFICATES OF BIRTH.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 




     SECTION
1.  Chapter 338, Hawaii Revised Statutes,
is amended by adding a new section to part I to be appropriately designated and
to read as follows:
     "§338-  
  Certificates
of birth; sex designation.  Each new certificate of birth issued by
the State after the effective date of this Act shall include a designation of
the sex of the person born, based on the genitalia of the person."
     SECTION 2.  Section 338-17.7, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is
amended by amending subsection (a) to read as follows:
     "(a)  The department of health shall establish, in
the following circumstances, a new certificate of birth for a person born in
this State who already has a birth certificate filed with the department and
who is referred to below as the "birth registrant":
     (1)  Upon receipt of an
affidavit of paternity, a court order establishing paternity, or a certificate
of marriage establishing the marriage of the natural parents to each other,
together with a request from the birth registrant, or the birth registrant's
parent or other person having legal custody of the birth registrant, that a new
birth certificate be prepared because previously recorded information has been
altered pursuant to law;
     (2)  Upon receipt of a
certified copy of a final order, judgment, or decree of a court of competent
jurisdiction that determined the nonexistence of a parent and child
relationship between a person identified as a parent on the birth certificate
on file and the birth registrant;
     (3)  Upon receipt of a
certified copy of a final adoption decree, or of an abstract of the decree,
pursuant to sections 338-20 and 578-14;
     (4)  Upon
receipt of an affidavit from a United States licensed physician or physician
assistant attesting that:
          (A)  The physician or
physician assistant has a bona fide provider-patient relationship with the
birth registrant;
          (B)  The physician or
physician assistant has [treated and evaluated] examined the
birth registrant [and has reviewed and evaluated the birth registrant's
medical history;
          (C)  The
birth registrant has had appropriate clinical treatment for gender transition
to the new gender and has completed the transition to the new gender]; and
         [(D)] (C)  The [new
gender] sex of the birth registrant, based on the genitalia of the birth
registrant, does not align with the sex designation on the birth
registrant's birth certificate; [or]
          provided
that the birth registrant is at least eighteen years of age; or
     (5)  Upon request of a
law enforcement agency certifying that a new birth certificate showing
different information would provide for the safety of the birth registrant;
provided that the new birth certificate shall contain information requested by
the law enforcement agency, shall be assigned a new number and filed
accordingly, and shall not substitute for the birth registrant's original birth
certificate, which shall remain in place."
     SECTION 3.  This Act does not affect rights and duties
that matured, penalties that were incurred, and proceedings that were begun
before its effective date.
     SECTION 4.  Statutory material to be repealed is
bracketed and stricken.  New statutory
material is underscored.
     SECTION 5.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 



INTRODUCED BY:


_____________________________




 


 







 


 
Report Title:
Health;
Certificates of Birth; Designations of Sex; Revisions
 
Description:
Provides
that a new certificate of birth issued by the State shall include a designation
of the sex of the person born, based on the genitalia of the person.  Authorizes amendments of designations of sex
on certificates of birth, provided that the birth registrant is an adult, and
new designation is based on the genitalia of the birth registrant, as confirmed
by a physician or physician's assistant.
 
 
 
The summary description
of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is
not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.




 
88R2452 SRA-D


 


 

		By: Patterson
H.B. No. 643




 


 



 		
			

A BILL TO BE ENTITLED




 
			

AN ACT




 
			
relating to the definition of sexually oriented business.



 
			
       BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF TEXAS:



 
			
       SECTION 1.  Section 102.051, Business & Commerce Code, is 



 
			
amended to read as follows:



 
			
       Sec. 102.051.  DEFINITIONS.  In this subchapter:



 
			
             (1)  "Drag performance" has the meaning assigned by 



 
			
Section 243.002, Local Government Code.



 
			
             (1-a) "Nude" means:



 
			
                   (A)  entirely unclothed; or



 
			
                   (B)  clothed in a manner that leaves uncovered or 



 
			
visible through less than fully opaque clothing any portion of the 



 
			
breasts below the top of the areola of the breasts, if the person is 



 
			
female, or any portion of the genitals or buttocks.



 
			
             (2)  "Sexually oriented business" means a nightclub, 



 
			
bar, restaurant, or similar commercial enterprise that:



 
			
                   (A)  provides for an audience of two or more 



 
			
individuals:



 
			
                         (i)  live nude entertainment or live nude 



 
			
performances; or



 
			
                         (ii)  a drag performance; and



 
			
                   (B)  authorizes on-premises consumption of 



 
			
alcoholic beverages, regardless of whether the consumption of 



 
			
alcoholic beverages is under a license or permit issued under the 



 
			
Alcoholic Beverage Code.



 
			
       SECTION 2.  Section 243.002, Local Government Code, is 



 
			
amended to read as follows:



 
			
       Sec. 243.002.  DEFINITIONS [DEFINITION].  In this chapter:



 
			
             (1)  "Drag performance" means a performance in which a 



 
			
performer exhibits a gender identity that is different than the 



 
			
performer's gender assigned at birth using clothing, makeup, or 



 
			
other physical markers and sings, lip syncs, dances, or otherwise 



 
			
performs before an audience for entertainment.



 
			
             (2)  "Sexually [, "sexually] oriented business" means:



 
			
                   (A)  a sex parlor, nude studio, modeling studio, 



 
			
love parlor, adult bookstore, adult movie theater, adult video 



 
			
arcade, adult movie arcade, adult video store, adult motel, or 



 
			
other commercial enterprise the primary business of which is the 



 
			
offering of a service or the selling, renting, or exhibiting of 



 
			
devices or any other items intended to provide sexual stimulation 



 
			
or sexual gratification to the customer; or



 
			
                   (B)  a nightclub, bar, restaurant, or other 



 
			
commercial enterprise that provides for an audience of two or more 



 
			
individuals a drag performance.



 
			
       SECTION 3.  This Act takes effect September 1, 2023.



<![endif]-->




THE SENATE


S.B. NO.


1428




THIRTY-SECOND LEGISLATURE, 2023


 




STATE OF HAWAII


 




 


 




 




 
 



A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
relating
to parental rights in education.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 




     SECTION
1.  Chapter
302A, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new section to be
properly designated and to read as follows:
     "§302A-     Student
welfare.  (a)  The board shall adopt procedures for notifying
a student's parent if there is a change in the student's services or monitoring
related to the student's mental, emotional, or physical health or well-being
and the school's ability to provide a safe and supportive learning environment
for the student.  The procedures shall reinforce
the fundamental right of parents to make decisions regarding the upbringing and
control of their children by requiring school personnel to encourage a student
to discuss issues relating to the student's well-being with the student's parent
or to facilitate discussion of the issue with the parent.  The procedures shall not prohibit parents from
accessing any of their student's education and health records created,
maintained, or used by the department.
     (b)  The board shall not adopt procedures or
student support forms that prohibit school personnel from notifying a parent
about the student's mental, emotional, or physical health or well-being, or a
change in related services or monitoring, or that encourage or have the effect
of encouraging a student to withhold from a parent such information.  School personnel shall not discourage or
prohibit parental notification of and involvement in critical decisions
affecting a student's mental, emotional, or physical health or well-being.  This subsection does not prohibit the
department from adopting procedures that permit school personnel to withhold
information from a parent if a reasonably prudent person would believe that
disclosure would result in abuse, abandonment, or neglect.
     (c)  Classroom instruction
by school personnel or third parties on sexual orientation or gender identity shall
not occur in kindergarten through grade three or in a manner that is not age
appropriate or developmentally appropriate for students in accordance with
state standards.
     (d)  Student support
services training developed or provided by the department to school personnel shall
adhere to student services guidelines, standards, and frameworks established by
the department.
     (e)  At the beginning of the
school year, the department shall notify parents of each healthcare service
offered at their student's school and the option to withhold consent or decline
any specific service.  Parental consent
to a health care service does not waive the parent's right to access the student's
educational or health records or to be notified about a change in the student's
services or monitoring as provided by this subsection.
     (f)  Before administering a student well-being
questionnaire or health screening form to a student in kindergarten through
grade three, the department shall provide the questionnaire or health screening
form to the parent and obtain the permission of the parent.
     (g)  The board shall adopt procedures for a parent
to notify the principal, or the principal's designee, regarding concerns under
this section at the student's school and the process for resolving those
concerns within seven calendar days after notification by the parent.  The procedures shall require that within
thirty days after notification by the parent that the concern remains
unresolved, the department shall either resolve the concern or provide a
statement of the reasons for not resolving the concern:
     (1)  If a concern is
not resolved by the department, a parent may:
          (A)  Request
the superintendent to appoint a special master who is an attorney licensed to
practice in the State and who has at least five years' experience in
administrative law.  The special master shall
determine facts relating to the dispute over the departmental procedure or
practice, consider information provided by the department and render a
recommended decision for resolution to the board within thirty days after
receipt of the request by the parent.  The
board shall approve or reject the recommended decision at its next regularly
scheduled meeting that is more than seven calendar days and no more than thirty
days after the date the recommended decision is transmitted.  The costs of the special master shall be borne
by the department.  The board shall adopt
rules, including forms, necessary to implement this subparagraph; or
          (B)  Bring
an action against the department to obtain a declaratory judgment that the
department procedure or practice violates this subsection and seek injunctive
relief.  A court may award damages and
shall award reasonable attorney fees and court costs to a parent who receives
declaratory or injunctive relief;
     (2)  The board shall
adopt policies to notify parents of the procedures required under this subsection;
and
     (3)  Nothing
contained in this subsection shall be construed to abridge or alter rights of
action or remedies in equity already existing under the common or general law."
     SECTION
2.  By June 30, 2024, the department of education shall review and update, as
necessary, school counseling frameworks and standards; educator practices and
professional conduct principles; and any other student services personnel
guidelines, standards, or frameworks in accordance with the requirements of
this Act.
     SECTION 3.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 4.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2023.
 



INTRODUCED BY:


_____________________________




 


 








 
Report Title:
Parental Rights
in Education
 
Description:
Bans
instruction related to sexual orientation and gender identity in public
schools.  Establishes new parental rights
regarding health services and records.  Establishes
the parental right to sue and receive damages if schools fail to adhere to new
provisions.
 
 
 
The summary description
of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is
not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.




MISSISSIPPI LEGISLATURE
2023 Regular Session
To: Public Health and Human Services
By: Representatives Newman, Gunn, Eubanks, Tullos, Brown
(20th), Williamson, Hopkins
House Bill 1125
AN ACT TO CREATE THE "REGULATE EXPERIMENTAL ADOLESCENT PROCEDURES
(REAP)" ACT FOR ANY PERSON UNDER EIGHTEEN YEARS OF AGE; TO PROVIDE DEFINITIONS
FOR THE ACT; TO PROHIBIT THE DIRECT OR INDIRECT USE, GRANT, PAYMENT OR
DISTRIBUTION OF PUBLIC FUNDS TO ANY ENTITY, ORGANIZATION OR INDIVIDUAL THAT PROVIDES
GENDER TRANSITION PROCEDURES TO A PERSON UNDER EIGHTEEN
YEARS OF AGE; TO PROVIDE THAT HEALTH CARE SERVICES FURNISHED IN A STATE OR
LOCALLY-OWNED HEALTH CARE FACILITY OR BY A PHYSICIAN OR OTHER HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONAL
EMPLOYED BY THE STATE OR LOCAL GOVERNMENT SHALL NOT INCLUDE GENDER TRANSITION PROCEDURES
FOR A PERSON UNDER  EIGHTEEN YEARS OF AGE; TO PROVIDE THAT AMOUNTS PAID DURING
A TAXABLE YEAR FOR PROVISION OF GENDER TRANSITION PROCEDURES OR AS PREMIUMS FOR
HEALTH CARE COVERAGE THAT INCLUDES COVERAGE FOR GENDER TRANSITION PROCEDURES
ARE NOT DEDUCTIBLE UNDER THE STATE INCOME TAX LAWS; TO AUTHORIZE THE ATTORNEY
GENERAL TO BRING AN ACTION TO ENFORCE COMPLIANCE WITH THIS ACT; TO CREATE NEW
SECTION 43-13-117.7, MISSISSIPPI CODE OF 1972, TO PROHIBIT THE DIVISION OF
MEDICAID FROM REIMBURSING OR PROVIDING COVERAGE FOR GENDER TRANSITION
PROCEDURES FOR A PERSON UNDER EIGHTEEN YEARS OF AGE; TO AMEND SECTION 83-9-22,
MISSISSIPPI CODE OF 1972, TO PROVIDE THAT HEALTH COVERAGE PLANS ARE NOT REQUIRED
TO INCLUDE GENDER TRANSITION PROCEDURES; TO CREATE NEW SECTION 83-9-37,
MISSISSIPPI CODE OF 1972, TO PROVIDE THAT A HEALTH BENEFIT PLAN UNDER AN
INSURANCE POLICY OR OTHER PLAN PROVIDING HEALTH CARE COVERAGE SHALL NOT INCLUDE
REIMBURSEMENT FOR GENDER TRANSITION PROCEDURES FOR A PERSON UNDER EIGHTEEN
YEARS OF AGE; TO AMEND SECTIONS 27-7-17, 73-15-29 AND 73-25-29, MISSISSIPPI
CODE OF 1972, TO CONFORM TO THE PROVISIONS OF THIS ACT; TO AMEND SECTION 73-25-33,
MISSISSIPPI CODE OF 1972, TO EXCLUDE THE PERFORMANCE GENDER TRANSITION PROCEDURES
FROM THE "PRACTICE OF MEDICINE" MEANING; TO AMEND SECTION 11-46-5,
MISSISSIPPI CODE OF 1972, TO EXCLUDE FROM TORT IMMUNITY VIOLATIONS OF THIS ACT;
TO AMEND SECTION 41-41-219, MISSISSIPPI CODE OF 1972, TO CONFORM TO THE PRECEDING
SECTION; TO PROVIDE SEVERABILITY IF ANY PART OF THIS ACT IS FOUND UNCONSTITUTIONAL;
AND FOR RELATED PURPOSES.
     BE IT ENACTED BY THE
LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF MISSISSIPPI:
     SECTION 1.  This
act shall be known and may be cited as the "Regulate Experimental Adolescent
Procedures (REAP) Act.  
     SECTION 2.  For
purposes of this act, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed
herein:
          (a)  "Sex"
means the biological indication of male and female in the context of reproductive
potential or capacity, such as sex chromosomes, naturally occurring sex
hormones, gonads, and nonambiguous internal and external genitalia present at
birth, without regard to an individual's psychological, chosen, or subjective
experience of gender;
          (b)  "Cross-sex
hormones" means:
               (i)  Testosterone
or other androgens given to females in amounts that are larger or more potent
than would normally occur naturally in healthy sex females; and
               (ii)  Estrogen
given to males in amounts that are larger or more potent than would normally
occur naturally in healthy sex males;
          (c)  "Gender"
means the psychological, behavioral, social, and cultural aspects of being male
or female;
          (d)  "Gender
reassignment surgery" means any medical or surgical service that seeks to surgically
alter or remove healthy physical or anatomical characteristics or features, except
for a male circumcision that are typical for the individual's sex, in order to
instill or create physiological or anatomical characteristics that resemble a sex
different from the individual's sex, including, without limitation:
               (i)  Surgical
procedures such as penectomy, castration, orchiectomy, vaginoplasty,
clitoroplasty, or vulvoplasty for male patients;
               (ii) Surgical procedures
such as hysterectomy, oophorectomy, reconstruction of the urethra, metoidioplasty,
phalloplasty, vaginectomy, scrotoplasty, or implantation of erection or
testicular prostheses for female patients;
               (iii)  Surgical
procedures such as augmentation mammoplasty, facial feminization surgery, liposuction,
lipofilling, voice surgery, thyroid cartilage reduction, gluteal augmentation,
hair reconstruction, or various aesthetic procedures for male patients; or
               (iv)  Surgical procedures
such as subcutaneous mastectomy, voice surgery, liposuction, lipofilling,
pectoral implants, or various aesthetic procedures for female patients;
          (e)  "Gender
transition" means the process in which a person goes from identifying with
and living as a gender that corresponds to his or her sex to identifying with
and living as a gender different from his or her sex, and may involve social,
legal, or physical changes;
          (f)  (i)  "Gender
transition procedures" means any of the following medical or surgical services
performed for the purpose of assisting an individual with a gender transition:
                    1.  Prescribing
or administering puberty-blocking drugs;
                    2.  Prescribing
or administering cross-sex hormones; or
                    3.  Performing
gender reassignment surgeries.
               (ii)  "Gender
transition procedures" do not include:
                    1.  Services
to persons born with a medically verifiable disorder of sex development,
including a person with external sex characteristics that are irresolvably
ambiguous, such as those born with forty-six (46) XX chromosomes with virilization,
forty-six (46) XY chromosomes with undervirilization, or having both ovarian
and testicular tissue;
                    2.  Services
provided when a physician has otherwise diagnosed a disorder of sexual
development that the physician has determined through genetic or biochemical
testing that the person does not have normal sex chromosome structure, sex
steroid hormone production, or sex steroid hormone action;
                    3.  The
treatment of any infection, injury, disease, or disorder that has been caused
by or exacerbated by the performance of gender transition procedures, whether
or not the gender transition procedure was performed in accordance with state
and federal law or whether or not the funding for the gender transition
procedure is permissible under this act; or
                    4.  Any
procedure for a male circumcision;
          (g)  "Health care
professional" means a person who is licensed, certified, or otherwise
authorized by the laws of this state to administer health care in the ordinary
course of the practice of his or her profession;
          (h)  "Physician"
means a person who is licensed to practice medicine in this state as provided in
Sections 73-25-1 etc.;
          (i)  "Puberty-blocking
drugs" means gonadotropin-releasing hormone analogues or other synthetic
drugs used in males to stop luteinizing hormone secretion and therefore testosterone
secretion, or synthetic drugs used in females which stop the production of
estrogens and progesterone, when used to delay or suppress pubertal development
in children for the purpose of assisting an individual with a gender transition;
and
          (j)  "Public funds"
means federal, state, county, or local government monies, in addition to any
department, agency, or instrumentality authorized or appropriated under state
law or derived from any fund in which such monies are deposited.
     SECTION 3.  (1)
 A person shall not knowingly provide gender transition procedures to any person
under eighteen (18) years of age.
     (2)  A person shall not knowingly
engage in conduct that aids or abets the performance or inducement of gender transition
procedures to any person under eighteen (18) years of age.  This subsection may
not be construed to impose liability on any speech protected by federal or
state law.
     SECTION 4.  Prohibition
on use of public funds or tax deduction for gender transition procedures.  (1)
 Public funds, resources, facilities, personnel or any other
thing of value that is provided by the United States or the State of Mississippi
shall not be directly or indirectly used, granted, paid, or distributed to any
entity, organization, or individual that provides gender transition procedures
to a person under eighteen (18) years of age in violation of this act.
     (2)  Health
care services furnished in the following situations shall not include gender
transition procedures for a person under eighteen (18) years of age:
          (a)  By or in a health care
facility owned by the state or a county or local government; or
          (b)  By a physician or
other health care professional employed by the state or a county or local
government.
     (3)  Any
amount paid by an individual or an entity during a taxable year for provision
of gender transition procedures or as premiums for health care coverage that includes
coverage for gender transition procedures is not deductible under the state income
tax laws.
     SECTION 5.  Enforcement.
 (1)  Any violation of Section 3 by a physician or other
health care professional shall be considered outside the applicable standard of
care and is unprofessional conduct.  A physician who violates Section 3 shall have
his or her license to practice medicine in the State of Mississippi revoked pursuant
to action taken by the Mississippi State Board of Medical Licensure.  A nonphysician
healthcare professional who violates Section 3 shall have his or her license to
practice their healthcare profession in the State of Mississippi revoked pursuant
to action taken by the applicable licensing entity.
     (2)  A person may assert an
actual or threatened violation of this act as a claim or defense in a judicial or
administrative proceeding and obtain compensatory damages, punitive damages, injunctive
relief, declaratory relief, or any other appropriate relief.  Such claim may be
brought against any facility, individual or entity causing or contributing to a
violation of this act.
     (3)  (a)  A person must
bring a claim for a violation of this act no later than thirty (30) years after
the day the cause of action accrues.
          (b)  A person under eighteen
(18) years of age may bring an action throughout their minority through a
parent or next friend, and may bring an action in their own name upon reaching
majority at any time from that point until thirty (30) years after reaching the
age of majority.
     (4)  Notwithstanding any
other provision of law, an action under this act may be commenced, and relief
may be granted, in a judicial proceeding without regard to whether the person
commencing the action has sought or exhausted available administrative remedies.
     (5)  In any action or
proceeding to enforce a provision of this act, a prevailing party who
establishes a violation of this act shall recover reasonable attorney's fees.
     (6)  (a)  The Attorney General shall bring an action to enforce
compliance with this act.
          (b)  This act does not deny,
impair, or otherwise affect any right or authority of the Attorney General, the
State of Mississippi, or any agency, officer, or employee of the state, acting
under any law other than this act, to institute or intervene in any proceeding.
     SECTION 6.  Section
27-7-17, Mississippi Code of 1972, is amended as follows:
     27-7-17.  In computing taxable
income, there shall be allowed as deductions:
     (1)  Business deductions.
          (a)  Business expenses. 
All the ordinary and necessary expenses paid or incurred during the taxable year
in carrying on any trade or business, including a reasonable allowance for salaries
or other compensation for personal services actually rendered; nonreimbursable traveling
expenses incident to current employment, including a reasonable amount expended
for meals and lodging while away from home in the pursuit of a trade or business;
and rentals or other payments required to be made as a condition of the continued
use or possession, for purposes of the trade or business of property to which the
taxpayer has not taken or is not taking title or in which he had no equity.  Expense
incurred in connection with earning and distributing nontaxable income is not an
allowable deduction.  Limitations on entertainment expenses shall conform to the
provisions of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.  There shall also be allowed a
deduction for expenses as provided in Section 41-137-51.
          (b)  Interest.  All
interest paid or accrued during the taxable year on business indebtedness, except
interest upon the indebtedness for the purchase of tax-free bonds, or any stocks,
the dividends from which are nontaxable under the provisions of this article; provided,
however, in the case of securities dealers, interest payments or accruals on loans,
the proceeds of which are used to purchase tax-exempt securities, shall be deductible
if income from otherwise tax-free securities is reported as income.  Investment
interest expense shall be limited to investment income.  Interest expense incurred
for the purchase of treasury stock, to pay dividends, or incurred as a result of
an undercapitalized affiliated corporation may not be deducted unless an ordinary
and necessary business purpose can be established to the satisfaction of the commissioner.
 For the purposes of this paragraph, the phrase "interest upon the indebtedness
for the purchase of tax-free bonds" applies only to the indebtedness incurred
for the purpose of directly purchasing tax-free bonds and does not apply to any
other indebtedness incurred in the regular course of the taxpayer's business.  Any
corporation, association, organization or other entity taxable under Section 27-7-23(c)
shall allocate interest expense as provided in Section 27-7-23(c)(3)(I).
          (c)  Taxes.  Taxes
paid or accrued within the taxable year, except state and federal income taxes,
excise taxes based on or measured by net income, estate and inheritance taxes, gift
taxes, cigar and cigarette taxes, gasoline taxes, and sales and use taxes unless
incurred as an item of expense in a trade or business or in the production of taxable
income.  In the case of an individual, taxes permitted as an itemized deduction
under the provisions of subsection (3)(a) of this section are to be claimed thereunder.
          (d)  Business losses.
              (i)  Losses sustained
during the taxable year not compensated for by insurance or otherwise, if incurred
in trade or business, or nonbusiness transactions entered into for profit.
               (ii)  Limitations on
losses from passive activities and rental real estate shall conform to the provisions
of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
          (e)  Bad debts. 
Losses from debts ascertained to be worthless and charged off during the taxable
year, if sustained in the conduct of the regular trade or business of the taxpayer;
provided, that such losses shall be allowed only when the taxpayer has reported
as income, on the accrual basis, the amount of such debt or account.
          (f)  Depreciation. 
A reasonable allowance for exhaustion, wear and tear of property used in the trade
or business, or rental property, and depreciation upon buildings based upon their
reasonable value as of March 16, 1912, if acquired prior thereto, and upon cost
if acquired subsequent to that date.  In the case of new or used aircraft, equipment,
engines, or other parts and tools used for aviation, allowance for bonus depreciation
conforms with the federal bonus depreciation rates and reasonable allowance for
depreciation under this section is no less than one hundred percent (100%). 
          (g)  Depletion.  In
the case of mines, oil and gas wells, other natural deposits and timber, a reasonable
allowance for depletion and for depreciation of improvements, based upon cost, including
cost of development, not otherwise deducted, or fair market value as of March 16,
1912, if acquired prior to that date, such allowance to be made upon regulations
prescribed by the commissioner, with the approval of the Governor.
          (h)  Contributions or
gifts.  Except as otherwise provided in paragraph (p) of this subsection or
subsection (3)(a) of this section for individuals, contributions or gifts made by
corporations within the taxable year to corporations, organizations, associations
or institutions, including Community Chest funds, foundations and trusts created
solely and exclusively for religious, charitable, scientific or educational purposes,
or for the prevention of cruelty to children or animals, no part of the net earnings
of which inure to the benefit of any private stockholder or individual.  This deduction
shall be allowed in an amount not to exceed twenty percent (20%) of the net income. 
Such contributions or gifts shall be allowable as deductions only if verified under
rules and regulations prescribed by the commissioner, with the approval of the Governor. 
Contributions made in any form other than cash shall be allowed as a deduction,
subject to the limitations herein provided, in an amount equal to the actual market
value of the contributions at the time the contribution is actually made and consummated.
          (i)  Reserve funds -
insurance companies.  In the case of insurance companies the net additions required
by law to be made within the taxable year to reserve funds when such reserve funds
are maintained for the purpose of liquidating policies at maturity.
          (j)  Annuity income. 
The sums, other than dividends, paid within the taxpayer year on policy or annuity
contracts when such income has been included in gross income.
          (k)  Contributions to
employee pension plans.  Contributions made by an employer to a plan or a trust
forming part of a pension plan, stock bonus plan, disability or death-benefit plan,
or profit-sharing plan of such employer for the exclusive benefit of some or all
of his, their, or its employees, or their beneficiaries, shall be deductible from
his, their, or its income only to the extent that, and for the taxable year in which,
the contribution is deductible for federal income tax purposes under the Internal
Revenue Code of 1986 and any other provisions of similar purport in the Internal
Revenue Laws of the United States, and the rules, regulations, rulings and determinations
promulgated thereunder, provided that:
              (i)  The plan or trust
be irrevocable.
               (ii)  The plan or trust
constitute a part of a pension plan, stock bonus plan, disability or death-benefit
plan, or profit-sharing plan for the exclusive benefit of some or all of the employer's
employees and/or officers, or their beneficiaries, for the purpose of distributing
the corpus and income of the plan or trust to such employees and/or officers, or
their beneficiaries.
              (iii)  No part of the
corpus or income of the plan or trust can be used for purposes other than for the
exclusive benefit of employees and/or officers, or their beneficiaries.
     Contributions to all plans or
to all trusts of real or personal property (or real and personal property combined)
or to insured plans created under a retirement plan for which provision has been
made under the laws of the United States of America, making such contributions deductible
from income for federal income tax purposes, shall be deductible only to the same
extent under the Income Tax Laws of the State of Mississippi.
          (l)  Net operating loss
carrybacks and carryovers.  A net operating loss for any taxable year ending
after December 31, 1993, and taxable years thereafter, shall be a net operating
loss carryback to each of the three (3) taxable years preceding the taxable year
of the loss.  If the net operating loss for any taxable year is not exhausted by
carrybacks to the three (3) taxable years preceding the taxable year of the loss,
then there shall be a net operating loss carryover to each of the fifteen (15) taxable
years following the taxable year of the loss beginning with any taxable year after
December 31, 1991.
     For any taxable year ending after
December 31, 1997, the period for net operating loss carrybacks and net operating
loss carryovers shall be the same as those established by the Internal Revenue Code
and the rules, regulations, rulings and determinations promulgated thereunder as
in effect at the taxable year end or on December 31, 2000, whichever is earlier.
     A net operating loss for any
taxable year ending after December 31, 2001, and taxable years thereafter, shall
be a net operating loss carryback to each of the two (2) taxable years preceding
the taxable year of the loss.  If the net operating loss for any taxable year is
not exhausted by carrybacks to the two (2) taxable years preceding the taxable year
of the loss, then there shall be a net operating loss carryover to each of the twenty
(20) taxable years following the taxable year of the loss beginning with any taxable
year after the taxable year of the loss.
     The term "net operating
loss," for the purposes of this paragraph, shall be the excess of the deductions
allowed over the gross income; provided, however, the following deductions shall
not be allowed in computing same:
               (i)  No net operating
loss deduction shall be allowed.
              (ii)  No personal exemption
deduction shall be allowed.
              (iii)  Allowable deductions
which are not attributable to taxpayer's trade or business shall be allowed only
to the extent of the amount of gross income not derived from such trade or business.
     Any taxpayer entitled to a carryback
period as provided by this paragraph may elect to relinquish the entire carryback
period with respect to a net operating loss for any taxable year ending after December
31, 1991.  The election shall be made in the manner prescribed by the Department
of Revenue and shall be made by the due date, including extensions of time, for
filing the taxpayer's return for the taxable year of the net operating loss for
which the election is to be in effect.  The election, once made for any taxable
year, shall be irrevocable for that taxable year.
          (m)  Amortization of
pollution or environmental control facilities.  Allowance of deduction.  Every
taxpayer, at his election, shall be entitled to a deduction for pollution or environmental
control facilities to the same extent as that allowed under the Internal Revenue
Code and the rules, regulations, rulings and determinations promulgated thereunder.
          (n)  Dividend distributions
- real estate investment trusts.  "Real estate investment trust" (hereinafter
referred to as REIT) shall have the meaning ascribed to such term in Section 856
of the federal Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended.  A REIT is allowed a dividend
distributed deduction if the dividend distributions meet the requirements of Section
857 or are otherwise deductible under Section 858 or 860, federal Internal Revenue
Code of 1986, as amended.  In addition:
              (i)  A dividend distributed
deduction shall only be allowed for dividends paid by a publicly traded REIT.  A
qualified REIT subsidiary shall be allowed a dividend distributed deduction if its
owner is a publicly traded REIT.
              (ii)  Income generated
from real estate contributed or sold to a REIT by a shareholder or related party
shall not give rise to a dividend distributed deduction, unless the shareholder
or related party would have received the dividend distributed deduction under this
chapter.
              (iii)  A holding corporation
receiving a dividend from a REIT shall not be allowed the deduction in Section 27-7-15(4)(t).
              (iv)  Any REIT not allowed
the dividend distributed deduction in the federal Internal Revenue Code of 1986,
as amended, shall not be allowed a dividend distributed deduction under this chapter.
     The commissioner is authorized
to promulgate rules and regulations consistent with the provisions in Section 269
of the federal Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, so as to prevent the evasion
or avoidance of state income tax.
          (o)  Contributions to
college savings trust fund accounts.  Contributions or payments to a Mississippi
Affordable College Savings Program account are deductible as provided under Section
37-155-113.  Payments made under a prepaid tuition contract entered into under the
Mississippi Prepaid Affordable College Tuition Program are deductible as provided
under Section 37-155-17.
          (p)  Contributions of
human pharmaceutical products.  To the extent that a "major supplier"
as defined in Section 27-13-13(2)(d) contributes human pharmaceutical products in
excess of Two Hundred Fifty Million Dollars ($250,000,000.00) as determined under
Section 170 of the Internal Revenue Code, the charitable contribution limitation
associated with those donations shall follow the federal limitation but cannot result
in the Mississippi net income being reduced below zero.
          (q)  Contributions to
ABLE trust fund accounts.  Contributions or payments to a Mississippi Achieving
a Better Life Experience (ABLE) Program account are deductible as provided under
Section 43-28-13.
     (2)  Restrictions on the deductibility
of certain intangible expenses and interest expenses with a related member.
          (a)  As used in this subsection
(2):
              (i)  "Intangible
expenses and costs" include:
                   1.  Expenses, losses
and costs for, related to, or in connection directly or indirectly with the direct
or indirect acquisition, use, maintenance or management, ownership, sale, exchange
or any other disposition of intangible property to the extent such amounts are allowed
as deductions or costs in determining taxable income under this chapter;
                   2.  Expenses or
losses related to or incurred in connection directly or indirectly with factoring
transactions or discounting transactions;
                    3.  Royalty, patent,
technical and copyright fees;
                    4.  Licensing
fees; and 
                   5.  Other similar
expenses and costs.
               (ii)  "Intangible
property" means patents, patent applications, trade names, trademarks, service
marks, copyrights and similar types of intangible assets.
              (iii)  "Interest
expenses and cost" means amounts directly or indirectly allowed as deductions
for purposes of determining taxable income under this chapter to the extent such
interest expenses and costs are directly or indirectly for, related to, or in connection
with the direct or indirect acquisition, maintenance, management, ownership, sale,
exchange or disposition of intangible property.
              (iv)  "Related
member" means an entity or person that, with respect to the taxpayer during
all or any portion of the taxable year, is a related entity, a component member
as defined in the Internal Revenue Code, or is an entity or a person to or from
whom there is attribution of stock ownership in accordance with Section 1563(e)
of the Internal Revenue Code.
               (v)  "Related
entity" means:
                    1.  A stockholder
who is an individual or a member of the stockholder's family, as defined in regulations
prescribed by the commissioner, if the stockholder and the members of the stockholder's
family own, directly, indirectly, beneficially or constructively, in the aggregate,
at least fifty percent (50%) of the value of the taxpayer's outstanding stock;
                   2.  A stockholder,
or a stockholder's partnership, limited liability company, estate, trust or corporation,
if the stockholder and the stockholder's partnerships, limited liability companies,
estates, trusts and corporations own, directly, indirectly, beneficially or constructively,
in the aggregate, at least fifty percent (50%) of the value of the taxpayer's outstanding
stock;
                   3.  A corporation,
or a party related to the corporation in a manner that would require an attribution
of stock from the corporation to the party or from the party to the corporation,
if the taxpayer owns, directly, indirectly, beneficially or constructively, at least
fifty percent (50%) of the value of the corporation's outstanding stock under regulation
prescribed by the commissioner;
                   4.  Any entity
or person which would be a related member under this section if the taxpayer were
considered a corporation for purposes of this section.
          (b)  In computing net income,
a taxpayer shall add back otherwise deductible interest expenses and costs and intangible
expenses and costs directly or indirectly paid, accrued to or incurred, in connection
directly or indirectly with one or more direct or indirect transactions with one
or more related members.
          (c)  The adjustments required
by this subsection shall not apply to such portion of interest expenses and costs
and intangible expenses and costs that the taxpayer can establish meets one (1)
of the following:
              (i)  The related member
directly or indirectly paid, accrued or incurred such portion to a person during
the same income year who is not a related member; or
              (ii)  The transaction
giving rise to the interest expenses and costs or intangible expenses and costs
between the taxpayer and related member was done primarily for a valid business
purpose other than the avoidance of taxes, and the related member is not primarily
engaged in the acquisition, use, maintenance or management, ownership, sale, exchange
or any other disposition of intangible property.
          (d)  Nothing in this subsection
shall require a taxpayer to add to its net income more than once any amount of interest
expenses and costs or intangible expenses and costs that the taxpayer pays, accrues
or incurs to a related member.
          (e)  The commissioner may
prescribe such regulations as necessary or appropriate to carry out the purposes
of this subsection, including, but not limited to, clarifying definitions of terms,
rules of stock attribution, factoring and discount transactions.
     (3)  Individual nonbusiness
deductions.
          (a)  The amount allowable
for individual nonbusiness itemized deductions for federal income tax purposes where
the individual is eligible to elect, for the taxable year, to itemize deductions
on his federal return except the following:
              (i)  The deduction for
state income taxes paid or other taxes allowed for federal purposes in lieu of state
income taxes paid;
              (ii)  The deduction
for gaming losses from gaming establishments;
              (iii)  The deduction
for taxes collected by licensed gaming establishments pursuant to Section
27-7-901;
              (iv)  The deduction
for taxes collected by gaming establishments pursuant to Section 27-7-903 * * *.; and
               (v)  The deduction
for medical expenses for the provision of gender transition procedures as defined
in Section 2 of this act.
          (b)  In lieu of the individual
nonbusiness itemized deductions authorized in paragraph (a), for all purposes other
than ordinary and necessary expenses paid or incurred during the taxable year in
carrying on any trade or business, an optional standard deduction of:
              (i)  Three Thousand
Four Hundred Dollars ($3,400.00) through calendar year 1997, Four Thousand Two Hundred
Dollars ($4,200.00) for the calendar year 1998 and Four Thousand Six Hundred Dollars
($4,600.00) for each calendar year thereafter in the case of married individuals
filing a joint or combined return;
              (ii)  One Thousand Seven
Hundred Dollars ($1,700.00) through calendar year 1997, Two Thousand One Hundred
Dollars ($2,100.00) for the calendar year 1998 and Two Thousand Three Hundred Dollars
($2,300.00) for each calendar year thereafter in the case of married individuals
filing separate returns;
              (iii)  Three Thousand
Four Hundred Dollars ($3,400.00) in the case of a head of family; or
               (iv)  Two Thousand
Three Hundred Dollars ($2,300.00) in the case of an individual who is not married.
     In the case of a husband and
wife living together, having separate incomes, and filing combined returns, the
standard deduction authorized may be divided in any manner they choose.  In the
case of separate returns by a husband and wife, the standard deduction shall not
be allowed to either if the taxable income of one of the spouses is determined without
regard to the standard deduction.
          (c)  A nonresident individual
shall be allowed the same individual nonbusiness deductions as are authorized for
resident individuals in paragraph (a) or (b) of this subsection; however, the nonresident
individual is entitled only to that proportion of the individual nonbusiness deductions
as his net income from sources within the State of Mississippi bears to his total
or entire net income from all sources.
     (4)  Nothing in this section
shall permit the same item to be deducted more than once, either in fact or in effect.
     (5)  Notwithstanding
any other provision in Title 27, Mississippi Code of 1972, there shall be allowed
an income tax deduction for otherwise deductible expenses if:
          (a)  The payment(s) for
such deductible expenses are made with the grant or loan program of the Paycheck
Protection Program as authorized under (i) the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic
Security (CARES) Act and the Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2021, (ii) the COVID-19
Economic Injury Disaster Loan Program, (iii) the 2020 COVID-19 Mississippi Business
Assistance Act, (iv) the Rental Assistance Grant Program, (v) the Shuttered Venue
Operators Grant Program and Restaurant Revitalization Fund authorized by the Economic
Aid to Hard-Hit Small Businesses, Nonprofits, and Venues Act, and amended by the
federal American Rescue Plan Act, and/or (vi) the Mississippi Agriculture Stabilization
Act; and
          (b)  Such deductible expenses
shall be allowed as deductions for federal income tax purposes.
     SECTION 7.  The
following shall be codified as Section 43-13-117.7, Mississippi Code of 1972:
     43-13-117.7.  Notwithstanding
any other provisions of Section 43-13-117, the division
shall not reimburse or provide coverage for gender transition procedures for a person
under eighteen (18) years of age.  As used in this section, the term "gender
transition procedures" means the same as defined in Section 2 of this act.
     SECTION 8.  Section
73-15-29, Mississippi Code of 1972, is amended as follows:
     73-15-29.  (1)  The board shall
have power to revoke, suspend or refuse to renew any license issued by the board,
or to revoke or suspend any privilege to practice, or to deny an application for
a license, or to fine, place on probation and/or discipline a licensee, in any manner
specified in this article, upon proof that such person:
          (a)  Has committed fraud
or deceit in securing or attempting to secure such license;
          (b)  Has been convicted
of a felony, or a crime involving moral turpitude or has had accepted by a court
a plea of nolo contendere to a felony or a crime involving moral turpitude (a certified
copy of the judgment of the court of competent jurisdiction of such conviction or
pleas shall be prima facie evidence of such conviction);
          (c)  Has negligently or
willfully acted in a manner inconsistent with the health or safety of the persons
under the licensee's care;
          (d)  Has had a license or
privilege to practice as a registered nurse or a licensed practical nurse suspended
or revoked in any jurisdiction, has voluntarily surrendered such license or privilege
to practice in any jurisdiction, has been placed on probation as a registered nurse
or licensed practical nurse in any jurisdiction or has been placed under a disciplinary
order(s) in any manner as a registered nurse or licensed practical nurse in any
jurisdiction, (a certified copy of the order of suspension, revocation, probation
or disciplinary action shall be prima facie evidence of such action);
          (e)  Has negligently or
willfully practiced nursing in a manner that fails to meet generally accepted standards
of such nursing practice;
          (f)  Has negligently or
willfully violated any order, rule or regulation of the board pertaining to nursing
practice or licensure;
          (g)  Has falsified or in
a repeatedly negligent manner made incorrect entries or failed to make essential
entries on records;
          (h)  Is addicted to or dependent
on alcohol or other habit-forming drugs or is a habitual user of narcotics, barbiturates,
amphetamines, hallucinogens, or other drugs having similar effect, or has misappropriated
any medication;
          (i)  Has a physical, mental
or emotional condition that renders the licensee unable to perform nursing services
or duties with reasonable skill and safety;
          (j)  Has engaged in any
other conduct, whether of the same or of a different character from that specified
in this article, that would constitute a crime as defined in Title 97 of the Mississippi
Code of 1972, as now or hereafter amended, and that relates to such person's employment
as a registered nurse or licensed practical nurse;
          (k)  Engages in conduct
likely to deceive, defraud or harm the public;
          (l)  Engages in any unprofessional
conduct as identified by the board in its rules;
          (m)  Has violated any provision
of this article; * * *or
          (n)  Violation(s) of the
provisions of Sections 41-121-1 through 41-121-9 relating to deceptive advertisement
by health care practitioners.  This paragraph shall stand repealed on July 1, 2025 * * *.; or
          (o)  Violation(s) of
any provision of Sections 1 through 6 of this act.
     (2)  When the board finds any
person unqualified because of any of the grounds set forth in subsection (1) of
this section, it may enter an order imposing one or more of the following penalties:
          (a)  Denying application
for a license or other authorization to practice nursing or practical nursing;
          (b)  Administering a reprimand;
          (c)  Suspending or restricting
the license or other authorization to practice as a registered nurse or licensed
practical nurse for up to two (2) years without review;
          (d)  Revoking the license
or other authorization to practice nursing or practical nursing;
          (e)  Requiring the disciplinee
to submit to care, counseling or treatment by persons and/or agencies approved or
designated by the board as a condition for initial, continued or renewed licensure
or other authorization to practice nursing or practical nursing;
          (f)  Requiring the disciplinee
to participate in a program of education prescribed by the board as a condition
for initial, continued or renewed licensure or other authorization to practice;
          (g)  Requiring the disciplinee
to practice under the supervision of a registered nurse for a specified period of
time; or
          (h)  Imposing a fine not
to exceed Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00).
     (3)  In addition to the grounds
specified in subsection (1) of this section, the board shall be authorized to suspend
the license or privilege to practice of any licensee for being out of compliance
with an order for support, as defined in Section 93-11-153.  The procedure for suspension
of a license or privilege to practice for being out of compliance with an order
for support, and the procedure for the reissuance or reinstatement of a license
or privilege to practice suspended for that purpose, and the payment of any fees
for the reissuance or reinstatement of a license or privilege to practice suspended
for that purpose, shall be governed by Section 93-11-157 or 93-11-163, as the case
may be.  If there is any conflict between any provision of Section 93-11-157 or
93-11-163 and any provision of this article, the provisions of Section 93-11-157
or 93-11-163, as the case may be, shall control.
     (4)  If the public health, safety
or welfare imperatively requires emergency action and the board incorporates a finding
to that effect in an order, the board may order summary suspension of a license
pending proceedings for revocation or other action.  These proceedings shall be
promptly instituted and determined by the board.
     (5)  The board may establish
by rule an alternative to discipline program for licensees who have an impairment
as a result of substance abuse or a mental health condition, which program shall
include at least the following components:
          (a)  Participation in the
program is voluntary with the licensee, and the licensee must enter the program
before the board holds a disciplinary action hearing regarding the licensee;
          (b)  The full cost of participation
in the program, including the cost of any care, counseling, treatment and/or education
received by the licensee, shall be borne by the licensee;
          (c)  All of the procedures
and records regarding the licensee's participation in the program shall be confidential,
shall not be disclosed and shall be exempt from the provisions of the Mississippi
Public Records Act of 1983; and
          (d)  A licensee may not
participate in the program more often than one (1) time during any period of five
(5) years or such longer period as set by the board.
     (6)  A nurse practitioner who
provides a written certification as authorized under the Mississippi Medical Cannabis
Act and in compliance with rules and regulations adopted thereunder shall not be
subject to any disciplinary action under this section solely due to providing the
written certification.
     SECTION 9.  Section
73-25-29, Mississippi Code of 1972, is amended as follows:
     73-25-29.  The grounds for the
nonissuance, suspension, revocation or restriction of a license or the denial of
reinstatement or renewal of a license are:
          (1)  Habitual personal use
of narcotic drugs, or any other drug having addiction-forming or addiction-sustaining
liability.
          (2)  Habitual use of intoxicating
liquors, or any beverage, to an extent which affects professional competency.
          (3)  Administering, dispensing
or prescribing any narcotic drug, or any other drug having addiction-forming or
addiction-sustaining liability otherwise than in the course of legitimate professional
practice.
          (4)  Conviction of violation
of any federal or state law regulating the possession, distribution or use of any
narcotic drug or any drug considered a controlled substance under state or federal
law, a certified copy of the conviction order or judgment rendered by the trial
court being prima facie evidence thereof, notwithstanding the pendency of any appeal.
          (5)  Procuring, or attempting
to procure, or aiding in, an abortion that is not medically indicated.
          (6)  Conviction of a felony
or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, a certified copy of the conviction order
or judgment rendered by the trial court being prima facie evidence thereof, notwithstanding
the pendency of any appeal.
          (7)  Obtaining or attempting
to obtain a license by fraud or deception.
          (8)  Unprofessional conduct,
which includes, but is not limited to:
              (a)  Practicing medicine
under a false or assumed name or impersonating another practitioner, living or dead.
              (b)  Knowingly performing
any act which in any way assists an unlicensed person to practice medicine.
               (c)  Making or willfully
causing to be made any flamboyant claims concerning the licensee's professional
excellence.
              (d)  Being guilty of
any dishonorable or unethical conduct likely to deceive, defraud or harm the public.
              (e)  Obtaining a fee
as personal compensation or gain from a person on fraudulent representation of a
disease or injury condition generally considered incurable by competent medical
authority in the light of current scientific knowledge and practice can be cured
or offering, undertaking, attempting or agreeing to cure or treat the same by a
secret method, which he refuses to divulge to the board upon request.
              (f)  Use of any false,
fraudulent or forged statement or document, or the use of any fraudulent, deceitful,
dishonest or immoral practice in connection with any of the licensing requirements,
including the signing in his professional capacity any certificate that is known
to be false at the time he makes or signs such certificate.
              (g)  Failing to identify
a physician's school of practice in all professional uses of his name by use of
his earned degree or a description of his school of practice.
          (9)  The refusal of a licensing
authority of another state or jurisdiction to issue or renew a license, permit or
certificate to practice medicine in that jurisdiction or the revocation, suspension
or other restriction imposed on a license, permit or certificate issued by such
licensing authority which prevents or restricts practice in that jurisdiction, a
certified copy of the disciplinary order or action taken by the other state or jurisdiction
being prima facie evidence thereof, notwithstanding the pendency of any appeal.
          (10)  Surrender of a license
or authorization to practice medicine in another state or jurisdiction or surrender
of membership on any medical staff or in any medical or professional association
or society while under disciplinary investigation by any of those authorities or
bodies for acts or conduct similar to acts or conduct which would constitute grounds
for action as defined in this section.
          (11)  Final sanctions imposed
by the United States Department of Health and Human Services, Office of Inspector
General or any successor federal agency or office, based upon a finding of incompetency,
gross misconduct or failure to meet professionally recognized standards of health
care; a certified copy of the notice of final sanction being prima facie evidence
thereof.  As used in this paragraph, the term "final sanction" means the
written notice to a physician from the United States Department of Health and Human
Services, Officer of Inspector General or any successor federal agency or office,
which implements the exclusion.
          (12)  Failure to furnish
the board, its investigators or representatives information legally requested by
the board.
          (13)  Violation of any provision(s)
of the Medical Practice Act or the rules and regulations of the board or of any
order, stipulation or agreement with the board.
          (14)  Violation(s) of the
provisions of Sections 41-121-1 through 41-121-9 relating to deceptive advertisement
by health care practitioners.
          (15)  Performing or inducing
an abortion on a woman in violation of any provision of Sections 41-41-131 through
41-41-145.
          (16)  Performing an abortion
on a pregnant woman after determining that the unborn human individual that the
pregnant woman is carrying has a detectable fetal heartbeat as provided in Section
41-41-34.1.
          (17)  Violation(s) of
any provision of Sections 1 through 6 of this act.
     In addition to the grounds specified
above, the board shall be authorized to suspend the license of any licensee for
being out of compliance with an order for support, as defined in Section 93-11-153. 
The procedure for suspension of a license for being out of compliance with an order
for support, and the procedure for the reissuance or reinstatement of a license
suspended for that purpose, and the payment of any fees for the reissuance or reinstatement
of a license suspended for that purpose, shall be governed by Section 93-11-157
or 93-11-163, as the case may be.  If there is any conflict between any provision
of Section 93-11-157 or 93-11-163 and any provision of this chapter, the provisions
of Section 93-11-157 or 93-11-163, as the case may be, shall control. 
     A physician who provides a written
certification as authorized under the Mississippi Medical Cannabis Act and in compliance
with rules and regulations adopted thereunder shall not be subject to any disciplinary
action under this section solely due to providing the written certification.
     SECTION 10.  Section
73-25-33, Mississippi Code of 1972, is amended as follows:
     73-25-33.  (1)  The
practice of medicine shall mean to suggest, recommend, prescribe, or direct for
the use of any person, any drug, medicine, appliance, or other agency, whether material
or not material, for the cure, relief, or palliation of any ailment or disease
of the mind or body, or for the cure or relief of any wound or fracture or
other bodily injury or deformity, or the practice of obstetrics or midwifery,
after having received, or with the intent of receiving therefor, either
directly or indirectly, any bonus, gift, profit or compensation; provided, that
nothing in this section shall apply to females engaged solely in the practice of
midwifery.
     (2)  The practice of medicine
shall not mean to provide gender transition procedures for any person under eighteen
(18) years of age; or
     (3)  For purposes of this
section, "gender transition procedures" means the same as defined in Section
2 of this act.
     SECTION 11.  Section
83-9-22, Mississippi Code of 1972, is amended as follows:
     83-9-22.  (1)  (a)  Notwithstanding
any other provision of the law to the contrary, except as otherwise provided in
subsections (3) and (4) of this section, no health coverage plan shall
restrict coverage for medically appropriate treatment prescribed by a physician
and agreed to by a fully informed insured, or if the insured lacks legal capacity
to consent by a person who has legal authority to consent on his or her behalf,
based on an insured's diagnosis with a terminal condition.  Refusing to pay for
treatment rendered to an insured near the end of life that is consistent with best
practices for treatment of a disease or condition, approved uses of a drug or device,
or uses supported by peer reviewed medical literature, is a per se violation of
this section.
          (b)  Violations of this
section shall constitute an unfair trade practice and subject the violator to the
penalties provided by law.
          (c)  As used in this section
"terminal condition" means any aggressive malignancy, chronic end-stage
cardiovascular or cerebral vascular disease, or any other disease, illness or condition
which a physician diagnoses as terminal.
          (d)  As used in this section,
a "health coverage plan" shall mean any hospital, health or medical expense
insurance policy, hospital or medical service contract, employee welfare benefit
plan, contract or agreement with a health maintenance organization or a preferred
provider organization, health and accident insurance policy, or any other insurance
contract of this type, including a group insurance plan and the State Health and
Life Insurance Plan.
     (2)  (a)  Notwithstanding any
other provision of the law to the contrary, no health benefit paid directly or indirectly
with state funds, specifically Medicaid, shall restrict coverage for medically appropriate
treatment prescribed by a physician and agreed to by a fully informed individual,
or if the individual lacks legal capacity to consent by a person who has legal authority
to consent on his or her behalf, based on an individual's diagnosis with a terminal
condition.
          (b)  Refusing to pay for
treatment rendered to an individual near the end of life that is consistent with
best practices for treatment of a disease or condition, approved uses of a drug
or device, or uses supported by peer reviewed medical literature, is a per se violation
of this section.
          (c)  As used in this section
"terminal condition" means any aggressive malignancy, chronic end-stage
cardiovascular or cerebral vascular disease, or any other disease, illness or condition
which a physician diagnoses as terminal. 
     (3)  This section does not require
a health coverage plan to cover and pay for the treatment of a person who is a cardholder
and registered qualifying patient with medical cannabis that is lawful under the
Mississippi Medical Cannabis Act and in compliance with rules and regulations adopted
thereunder.
     (4)  This section does not
require a health coverage plan to provide coverage for gender transition
procedures for a person under eighteen (18) years of age.  As used in this
section, the term "gender transition procedures" means the same as
defined in Section 2 of this act.
     SECTION 12.  The
following shall be codified as Section 83-9-37, Mississippi Code of 1972:
     83-9-37.  (1)  As used in this section, the term "gender transition
procedures" means the same as defined in Section 2 of this act.
     (2)  A
health benefit plan under an insurance policy or other plan providing health care
coverage in this state shall not include reimbursement for gender transition procedures
for a person under eighteen (18) years of age.
     (3)  A health benefit plan
under an insurance policy or other plan providing health care coverage in this
state is not required to provide coverage for gender transition procedures for
a person under eighteen (18) years of age.
     SECTION 13.  Section
11-46-5, Mississippi Code of 1972, is amended as follows:
     11-46-5.  (1) 
Notwithstanding the immunity granted in Section 11-46-3, or the provisions of
any other law to the contrary, the immunity of the state and its political
subdivisions from claims for money damages arising out of the torts of such
governmental entities and the torts of their employees while acting within the
course and scope of their employment is hereby waived from and after July 1,
1993, as to the state, and from and after October 1, 1993, as to political
subdivisions; provided, however, immunity of a governmental entity in any such
case shall be waived only to the extent of the maximum amount of liability
provided for in Section 11-46-15.
     (2)  For the purposes of
this chapter an employee shall not be considered as acting within the course and
scope of his employment and a governmental entity shall not be liable or be
considered to have waived immunity for any conduct of its employee if the
employee's conduct constituted fraud, malice, libel, slander, defamation or any
criminal offense other than traffic violations.
     (3)  For the purposes of
this chapter and not otherwise, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that any
act or omission of an employee within the time and at the place of his
employment is within the course and scope of his employment, except for actions
described in subsection (2) of Section 73-25-33 and subsection (5) of this section.
     (4)  Nothing contained in
this chapter shall be construed to waive the immunity of the state from suit in
federal courts guaranteed by the Eleventh Amendment to the Constitution of the
United States.
     (5)  For purposes of this
chapter, an employee shall not be considered as acting within the course and
scope of his or her employment and a governmental entity shall be liable or be considered
to have waived immunity for any conduct of its employee if the employee's
conduct constituted a violation of this act.
     SECTION 14.  Section
41-41-219, Mississippi Code of 1972, is amended as follows:
     41-41-219.  (1)  Except as
otherwise provided in this act, a health-care provider or institution
acting in good faith and in accordance with generally accepted health-care
standards applicable to the health-care provider or institution is not subject
to civil or criminal liability or to discipline for unprofessional conduct for:
          (a)  Complying with a
health-care decision of a person apparently having authority to make a health-care
decision for a patient, including a decision to withhold or withdraw health care;
          (b)  Declining to comply
with a health-care decision of a person based on a belief that the person then
lacked authority; or
          (c)  Complying with an
advance health-care directive and  assuming that the directive was valid when
made and has not been revoked or terminated.
     (2)  An individual acting as
agent or surrogate under Sections 41-41-201 through 41-41-229 is not subject to
civil or criminal liability or to discipline for unprofessional conduct for
health-care decisions made in good faith.
     SECTION 15.  If any
section, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase or any part of this act passed on
or after the effective date of this act is declared to be unconstitutional or
void, or if for any reason is declared to be invalid or of no effect, the remaining
sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, phrases or parts of this act shall be
in no manner affected thereby but shall remain in full force and effect.
     Unless the contrary intent
shall clearly appear in the particular act in question, each and every act
passed hereafter shall be read and construed as though the provisions of the
first paragraph of this section form an integral part thereof, whether
expressly set out therein or not.
     SECTION 16.  This act
shall take effect and be in force from and after its passage.







MISSISSIPPI LEGISLATURE
2023 Regular Session
To: Public Health and Human Services
By: Representative Ford (73rd)
House Bill 1124
AN ACT TO BE KNOWN AS THE MISSISSIPPI HELP NOT HARM ACT; TO
CREATE NEW SECTION 11-77-1, MISSISSIPPI CODE OF 1972, TO DEFINE TERMS; TO
CREATE NEW SECTION 11-77-3, MISSISSIPPI CODE OF 1972, TO PROHIBIT ANY PERSON
FROM KNOWINGLY PERFORMING OR PROVIDING GENDER REASSIGNMENT SURGERY OR SERVICES
TO A MINOR; TO PROVIDE THAT ANY LICENSED MEDICAL PROFESSIONAL WHO PERFORMS OR
PROVIDES GENDER REASSIGNMENT SURGERY OR SERVICES TO A MINOR SHALL HAVE HIS OR HER
LICENSE REVOKED; TO PROVIDE A PRIVATE CAUSE OF ACTION AGAINST A PHYSICIAN,
OSTEOPATH, HOSPITAL, PRESCRIBING CAREGIVER, CLINIC AND ANY OTHER HEALTH CARE
FACILITY FOR INJURIES ARISING OUT OF THE COURSE OF MEDICAL, SURGICAL OR OTHER
PROFESSIONAL SERVICES RELATED TO THE PERFORMANCE OF GENDER REASSIGNMENT SURGERY
OR SERVICES; TO PROVIDE THAT THIS CLAIM MUST BE BROUGHT WITHIN THIRTY YEARS
FROM THE DATE THAT THE ALLEGED ACT OCCURRED; TO AUTHORIZE THE ATTORNEY GENERAL
TO BRING AN ACTION TO ENFORCE COMPLIANCE WITH THIS SECTION; TO PROVIDE THAT
THIS SECTION DOES NOT APPLY TO CERTAIN SERVICES, TREATMENTS AND PROCEDURES; TO
AMEND SECTION 73-25-29, MISSISSIPPI CODE OF 1972, TO CONFORM TO THE PROVISIONS OF
THIS ACT; TO AMEND SECTION 73-25-33, MISSISSIPPI CODE OF 1972, TO REVISE THE DEFINITION
OF THE PRACTICE OF MEDICINE TO EXCLUDE GENDER REASSIGNMENT SURGERY OR SERVICES
FOR MINORS; TO AMEND SECTION 11-46-5, MISSISSIPPI CODE OF 1972, TO PROVIDE THAT
UNDER THE TORT CLAIMS ACT AN EMPLOYEE SHALL NOT BE CONSIDERED AS ACTING WITHIN
THE COURSE AND SCOPE OF HIS OR HER EMPLOYMENT AND A GOVERNMENTAL ENTITY MAY BE
LIABLE OR BE CONSIDERED TO HAVE WAIVED IMMUNITY FOR ANY CONDUCT OF ITS EMPLOYEE
IF THE EMPLOYEE'S CONDUCT VIOLATED THE PROVISIONS OF THIS ACT; TO CREATE NEW
SECTION 43-13-117.7, MISSISSIPPI CODE OF 1972, TO PROHIBIT THE DIVISION OF MEDICAID
FROM REIMBURSING ANY ENTITY FOR PART OR ALL OF THE COSTS OF CARE AND SERVICES
RENDERED FOR GENDER REASSIGNMENT SURGERY OR SERVICES; TO CREATE NEW SECTION 83-9-401,
MISSISSIPPI CODE OF 1972, TO PROHIBIT HEALTH COVERAGE PLANS THAT ARE FUNDED
WHOLLY OR IN PART BY STATE FUNDS OR STATE-EMPLOYEE CONTRIBUTIONS FROM REIMBURSING
OR AUTHORIZING PAYMENT OF PART OR ALL OF THE COSTS OF CARE AND SERVICES
RENDERED BY ANY ENTITY FOR GENDER REASSIGNMENT SURGERY OR SERVICES; TO AMEND
SECTION 11-1-60, MISSISSIPPI CODE OF 1972, TO PROVIDE THAT IN ANY CAUSE OF
ACTION FILED ON OR AFTER JULY 1, 2023, FOR A CLAIM BROUGHT UNDER SECTION 11-77-3,
IF THE TRIER OF FACT FINDS THE DEFENDANT LIABLE, THERE SHALL NOT BE A
LIMITATION PLACED ON THE NONECONOMIC DAMAGES AWARD THAT A TRIER OF FACT MAY
AWARD TO THE PLAINTIFF; AND FOR RELATED PURPOSES.
     BE IT ENACTED BY THE
LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF MISSISSIPPI:
     SECTION 1.  This act shall
be known and may be cited as the "Mississippi Help Not Harm Act."
     SECTION 2.  The following
shall be codified as Section 11-77-1, Mississippi Code of 1972:
     11-77-1.  For
purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings as defined
in this section:
          (a)  "Gender"
means the psychological, behavioral, social and cultural aspects of being male
or female.
          (b)  "Gender
reassignment surgery or services" means any of the following medical or
surgical services performed on an individual for the purpose of attempting to
alter the appearance of or affirm an individual's perception of his or her
gender or sex, if that appearance or perception is inconsistent with the
individual's sex:
               (i)  Prescribing
or administering puberty blocking medication to stop or delay normal puberty;
               (ii)  Prescribing
or administering supraphysiologic doses of testosterone or other androgens to
females;
               (iii)  Prescribing
or administering supraphysiologic doses of estrogen to males;
               (iv)  Performing
surgeries that sterilize, including castration, vasectomy, hysterectomy,
oophorectomy, orchiectomy, and penectomy;
               (v)  Performing
surgeries that artificially construct tissue with the appearance of genitalia
that differs from the individual's sex, including metoidioplasty, phalloplasty,
and vaginoplasty; or
               (vi)  Removing any
healthy or non-diseased body part or tissue, except for a male circumcision.
          (c)  "Sex"
means the biological indication of male and female in the context of
reproductive potential or capacity, such as sex chromosomes, naturally
occurring sex hormones, gonads and nonambiguous internal and external genitalia
present at birth, without regard to an individual's psychological, chosen or
subjective experience of gender.
     SECTION 3.  The
following shall be codified as Section 11-77-3, Mississippi Code of 1972:
     11-77-3.  (1)  No person
shall knowingly perform or provide gender reassignment surgery or services to a
minor.
     (2)  No person shall
knowingly engage in conduct that aids or abets in gender reassignment surgery
or services being performed on or provided to a minor.  This section may not be
construed to impose liability on any speech or conduct protected by federal or
state law.
     (3)  Any licensed medical
professional, including, but not limited to, a physician, osteopath, physician
assistant, nurse practitioner or nurse, who violates the prohibition in subsection
(1) or (2) of this section shall have his or her license in the State of
Mississippi revoked pursuant to action taken by their respective licensing
board.
     (4)  For any claim accruing
on or after July 1, 2023, a private cause of action may be brought against a
physician, osteopath, hospital, prescribing caregiver, clinic and any other
health care facility for injuries arising out of the course of medical,
surgical or other professional services related to the performance of gender
reassignment surgery or services.  
     (5)  For any claim accruing
on or after July 1, 2023, no claim as provided for in subsection (4) of this
section may be brought unless it is filed within thirty (30) years from the
date the alleged act occurred.
(6)  The Attorney
General may bring an action to enforce compliance with this section.  Nothing
in this section shall be construed to deny, impair, or otherwise affect any
right or authority of the Attorney General, the state, or any agency, officer,
or employee of the state to institute or intervene in any proceeding.
     (7)  This section shall not
apply to:
          (a)  Services provided
to individuals born with a medically verifiable disorder of sex development,
including a person with external sex characteristics that are irresolvably
ambiguous, such as an individual born with forty-six XX chromosomes with
virilization, forty-six XY chromosomes with undervirilization, or having both
ovarian and testicular tissue;       (b)  Services provided to an individual
when a physician has otherwise diagnosed a disorder of sexual development, in
which the physician has determined through genetic or biochemical testing that
the individual does not have normal sex chromosome structure, sex steroid
hormone production, or sex steroid hormone action for a biological male or
biological female; 
          (c)  The treatment of
any infection, injury, disease or disorder that has been caused or exacerbated
by the performance of gender transition procedures, whether or not the
procedures were performed in accordance with state and federal law; or 
                        (d)  Any procedure undertaken
because an individual suffers from a physical disorder, physical injury, or
physical illness that is certified by a physician and that would place the
individual in imminent danger of death or impairment of major bodily function
unless surgery is performed.
     SECTION 4.  Section
73-25-29, Mississippi Code of 1972, is amended as follows:
     73-25-29.  The grounds for the
nonissuance, suspension, revocation or restriction of a license or the denial of
reinstatement or renewal of a license are:
          (1)  Habitual personal use
of narcotic drugs, or any other drug having addiction-forming or addiction-sustaining
liability.
          (2)  Habitual use of intoxicating
liquors, or any beverage, to an extent which affects professional competency.
          (3)  Administering, dispensing
or prescribing any narcotic drug, or any other drug having addiction-forming or
addiction-sustaining liability otherwise than in the course of legitimate professional
practice.
          (4)  Conviction of violation
of any federal or state law regulating the possession, distribution or use of any
narcotic drug or any drug considered a controlled substance under state or federal
law, a certified copy of the conviction order or judgment rendered by the trial
court being prima facie evidence thereof, notwithstanding the pendency of any appeal.
          (5)  Procuring, or attempting
to procure, or aiding in, an abortion that is not medically indicated.
          (6)  Conviction of a felony
or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, a certified copy of the conviction order
or judgment rendered by the trial court being prima facie evidence thereof, notwithstanding
the pendency of any appeal.
          (7)  Obtaining or attempting
to obtain a license by fraud or deception.
          (8)  Unprofessional conduct,
which includes, but is not limited to:
              (a)  Practicing medicine
under a false or assumed name or impersonating another practitioner, living or dead.
              (b)  Knowingly performing
any act which in any way assists an unlicensed person to practice medicine.
               (c)  Making or willfully
causing to be made any flamboyant claims concerning the licensee's professional
excellence.
              (d)  Being guilty of
any dishonorable or unethical conduct likely to deceive, defraud or harm the public.
              (e)  Obtaining a fee
as personal compensation or gain from a person on fraudulent representation of a
disease or injury condition generally considered incurable by competent medical
authority in the light of current scientific knowledge and practice can be cured
or offering, undertaking, attempting or agreeing to cure or treat the same by a
secret method, which he refuses to divulge to the board upon request.
              (f)  Use of any false,
fraudulent or forged statement or document, or the use of any fraudulent, deceitful,
dishonest or immoral practice in connection with any of the licensing requirements,
including the signing in his professional capacity any certificate that is known
to be false at the time he makes or signs such certificate.
              (g)  Failing to identify
a physician's school of practice in all professional uses of his name by use of
his earned degree or a description of his school of practice.
          (9)  The refusal of a licensing
authority of another state or jurisdiction to issue or renew a license, permit or
certificate to practice medicine in that jurisdiction or the revocation, suspension
or other restriction imposed on a license, permit or certificate issued by such
licensing authority which prevents or restricts practice in that jurisdiction, a
certified copy of the disciplinary order or action taken by the other state or jurisdiction
being prima facie evidence thereof, notwithstanding the pendency of any appeal.
          (10)  Surrender of a license
or authorization to practice medicine in another state or jurisdiction or surrender
of membership on any medical staff or in any medical or professional association
or society while under disciplinary investigation by any of those authorities or
bodies for acts or conduct similar to acts or conduct which would constitute grounds
for action as defined in this section.
          (11)  Final sanctions imposed
by the United States Department of Health and Human Services, Office of Inspector
General or any successor federal agency or office, based upon a finding of incompetency,
gross misconduct or failure to meet professionally recognized standards of health
care; a certified copy of the notice of final sanction being prima facie evidence
thereof.  As used in this paragraph, the term "final sanction" means the
written notice to a physician from the United States Department of Health and Human
Services, Officer of Inspector General or any successor federal agency or office,
which implements the exclusion.
          (12)  Failure to furnish
the board, its investigators or representatives information legally requested by
the board.
          (13)  Violation of any provision(s)
of the Medical Practice Act or the rules and regulations of the board or of any
order, stipulation or agreement with the board.
          (14)  Violation(s) of the
provisions of Sections 41-121-1 through 41-121-9 relating to deceptive advertisement
by health care practitioners.
          (15)  Performing or inducing
an abortion on a woman in violation of any provision of Sections 41-41-131 through
41-41-145.
          (16)  Performing an abortion
on a pregnant woman after determining that the unborn human individual that the
pregnant woman is carrying has a detectable fetal heartbeat as provided in Section
41-41-34.1.
          (17)  Knowingly performing
gender reassignment surgery or services on a minor as prohibited in Section 11-77-3.
     In addition to the grounds specified
above, the board shall be authorized to suspend the license of any licensee for
being out of compliance with an order for support, as defined in Section 93-11-153. 
The procedure for suspension of a license for being out of compliance with an order
for support, and the procedure for the reissuance or reinstatement of a license
suspended for that purpose, and the payment of any fees for the reissuance or reinstatement
of a license suspended for that purpose, shall be governed by Section 93-11-157
or 93-11-163, as the case may be.  If there is any conflict between any provision
of Section 93-11-157 or 93-11-163 and any provision of this chapter, the provisions
of Section 93-11-157 or 93-11-163, as the case may be, shall control. 
     A physician who provides a written
certification as authorized under the Mississippi Medical Cannabis Act and in compliance
with rules and regulations adopted thereunder shall not be subject to any disciplinary
action under this section solely due to providing the written certification.
     SECTION 5.  Section
73-25-33, Mississippi Code of 1972, is amended as follows:
     73-25-33.  (1)  The
practice of medicine shall mean to suggest, recommend, prescribe, or direct for
the use of any person, any drug, medicine, appliance, or other agency, whether material
or not material, for the cure, relief, or palliation of any ailment or disease
of the mind or body, or for the cure or relief of any wound or fracture or
other bodily injury or deformity, or the practice of obstetrics or midwifery,
after having received, or with the intent of receiving therefor, either
directly or indirectly, any bonus, gift, profit or compensation; provided, that
nothing in this section shall apply to females engaged solely in the practice
of midwifery.
     (2)  The practice of medicine
shall not mean to knowingly provide gender reassignment surgery or services for
minors.  For purposes of this subsection, gender reassignment surgery or services
means the services or activities prohibited under Section 11-77-3.
     SECTION 6.  Section
11-46-5, Mississippi Code of 1972, is amended as follows:
     11-46-5.  (1) 
Notwithstanding the immunity granted in Section 11-46-3, or the provisions of
any other law to the contrary, the immunity of the state and its political
subdivisions from claims for money damages arising out of the torts of such
governmental entities and the torts of their employees while acting within the
course and scope of their employment is hereby waived from and after July 1,
1993, as to the state, and from and after October 1, 1993, as to political
subdivisions; provided, however, immunity of a governmental entity in any such
case shall be waived only to the extent of the maximum amount of liability
provided for in Section 11-46-15.
     (2)  For the purposes of
this chapter an employee shall not be considered as acting within the course and
scope of his or her employment and a governmental entity shall not be
liable or be considered to have waived immunity for any conduct of its employee
if the employee's conduct constituted fraud, malice, libel, slander, defamation
or any criminal offense other than traffic violations.
     (3)  For the purposes of
this chapter and not otherwise, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that any
act or omission of an employee within the time and at the place of his or her
employment is within the course and scope of his employment except for actions
described in Section 73-25-33(2) and subsection (5) of this section.
     (4)  Nothing contained in
this chapter shall be construed to waive the immunity of the state from suit in
federal courts guaranteed by the Eleventh Amendment to the Constitution of the
United States.
     (5)  For the purposes of
this chapter, an employee shall not be considered as acting within the course and
scope of his or her employment, and a governmental entity may be liable or be
considered to have waived immunity for any conduct of its employee if the
employee's conduct constituted an act in violation of Section 11-77-3.
     SECTION 7.  The
following shall be codified as Section 43-13-117.7, Mississippi Code of 1972:
     43-13-117.7.  (1)  For
purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the meanings as defined
in this subsection:
          (a)  "Gender"
means the psychological, behavioral, social and cultural aspects of being male
or female.
          (b)  "Gender
reassignment surgery or service" means any of the following medical or
surgical services performed on an individual for the purpose of attempting to alter
the appearance of or affirm an individual's perception of his or her gender or
sex, if that appearance or perception is inconsistent with the individual's
sex:
               (i)  Prescribing
or administering puberty blocking medication to stop or delay normal puberty;
               (ii)  Prescribing
or administering supraphysiologic doses of testosterone or other androgens to
females;
               (iii)  Prescribing
or administering supraphysiologic doses of estrogen to males;
               (iv)  Performing
surgeries that sterilize, including castration, vasectomy, hysterectomy,
oophorectomy, orchiectomy, and penectomy; 
               (v)  Performing
surgeries that artificially construct tissue with the appearance of genitalia
that differs from the individual's sex, including metoidioplasty, phalloplasty,
and vaginoplasty; or
                                    (vi)  Removing any
healthy or non-diseased body part or tissue, except for a male circumcision;
          (c)  "Sex"
means the biological indication of male and female in the context of
reproductive potential or capacity, such as sex chromosomes, naturally
occurring sex hormones, gonads and nonambiguous internal and external genitalia
present at birth, without regard to an individual's psychological, chosen or
subjective experience of gender.
     (2)  The division shall not authorize
payment of part or all of the costs of care and services rendered by any entity
for gender reassignment surgery or services.
     SECTION 8.  The
following shall be codified as Section 83-9-401, Mississippi Code of 1972:
     83-9-401.  (1)  For
purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the meanings as defined
in this subsection:
          (a)  "Gender"
means the psychological, behavioral, social and cultural aspects of being male
or female.
          (b)  "Gender
reassignment surgery or service" means any of the following medical or
surgical services performed on an individual for the purpose of attempting to
alter the appearance of or affirm an individual's perception of his or her
gender or sex, if that appearance or perception is inconsistent with the
individual's sex:
               (i)  Prescribing
or administering puberty blocking medication to stop or delay normal puberty;
               (ii)  Prescribing
or administering supraphysiologic doses of testosterone or other androgens to
females;
               (iii)  Prescribing
or administering supraphysiologic doses of estrogen to males;
               (iv)  Performing
surgeries that sterilize, including castration, vasectomy, hysterectomy, oophorectomy,
orchiectomy, and penectomy; 
               (v)  Performing
surgeries that artificially construct tissue with the appearance of genitalia
that differs from the individual's sex, including metoidioplasty, phalloplasty,
and vaginoplasty; or
               (vii)  Removing
any healthy or non-diseased body part or tissue, except for a male
circumcision. 
          (c)  "Health
coverage plan" means any health or medical expense insurance policy,
hospital or medical service contract, employee welfare benefit plan, contract
or agreement with a health maintenance organization or a preferred provider
organization, health and accident insurance policy, including a group insurance
plan and the State Health Plan.
          (d)  "Sex"
means the biological indication of male and female in the context of
reproductive potential or capacity, such as sex chromosomes, naturally
occurring sex hormones, gonads and nonambiguous internal and external genitalia
present at birth, without regard to an individual's psychological, chosen or
subjective experience of gender.
            (2)  No health coverage plan that is
funded wholly or in part by state funds or state-employee contributions shall
reimburse or authorize payment of part or all of the costs of care and services
rendered by any entity for gender reassignment surgery or services.
     SECTION 9.  Section
11-1-60, Mississippi Code of 1972, is amended as follows:
     11-1-60.  (1) 
For the purposes of this section, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings ascribed herein unless the context clearly requires otherwise:
          (a)  "Noneconomic
damages" means subjective, nonpecuniary damages arising from death, pain,
suffering, inconvenience, mental anguish, worry, emotional distress, loss of society
and companionship, loss of consortium, bystander injury, physical impairment,
disfigurement, injury to reputation, humiliation, embarrassment, loss of the
enjoyment of life, hedonic damages, other nonpecuniary damages, and any other
theory of damages such as fear of loss, illness or injury.  The term "noneconomic
damages" shall not include punitive or exemplary damages.
          (b)  "Actual
economic damages" means objectively verifiable pecuniary damages arising
from medical expenses and medical care, rehabilitation services, custodial
care, disabilities, loss of earnings and earning capacity, loss of income,
burial costs, loss of use of property, costs of repair or replacement of
property, costs of obtaining substitute domestic services, loss of employment,
loss of business or employment opportunities, and other objectively verifiable
monetary losses.
     (2)  (a)  In any cause of
action filed on or after September 1, 2004, for injury based on malpractice or
breach of standard of care against a provider of health care, including
institutions for the aged or infirm, in the event the trier of fact finds the
defendant liable, they shall not award the plaintiff more than Five Hundred
Thousand Dollars ($500,000.00) for noneconomic damages.
          (b)  In any civil
action filed on or after September 1, 2004, other than those actions described
in paragraph (a) of this subsection, in the event the trier of fact finds the
defendant liable, they shall not award the plaintiff more than One Million
Dollars ($1,000,000.00) for noneconomic damages.
     It is the intent of this section
to limit all noneconomic damages to the above.
          (c)  The trier of fact
shall not be advised of the limitations imposed by this subsection (2) and the
judge shall appropriately reduce any award of noneconomic damages that exceeds
the applicable limitation.
     (3)  Nothing contained in
subsection (1) of this section shall be construed as creating a cause of action
or as setting forth elements of or types of damages that are or are not
recoverable in any type of cause of action.
     (4)  For any claim accruing
on or after July 1, 2023, subsections (1) through (3) of this section shall not
apply to a claim brought according to Section 11-77-3 against a licensed physician,
osteopath or hospital for injuries arising out of the course of medical,
surgical or other professional services related to the performance of gender reassignment
surgery or services.  In any cause of action filed on or after July 1, 2023, for
a claim brought according to Section 11-77-3, if the trier of fact finds the
defendant liable, there shall not be a limitation placed on the noneconomic damages
award that a trier of fact may award to the plaintiff.
     SECTION 10.  This act
shall take effect and be in force from and after July 1, 2023.





<![endif]-->




THE SENATE


S.B. NO.


1429




THIRTY-SECOND LEGISLATURE, 2023


 




STATE OF HAWAII


 




 


 




 




 
 



A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
relating
to sex-specific student athletic teams.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 




     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that it is both proper
and healthy for a society to maintain opportunities for female athletes to
demonstrate their skill, strength, and athletic abilities while also providing
them with opportunities to obtain recognition and accolades, college
scholarships, and the numerous other long-term benefits that result from
success in athletic endeavors.
     The legislature also finds that in
recent years, the question of transgender athletes competing against
biologically opposite genders has stirred controversies across the nation, with
male-to-female transgender athletes winning events ranging from girls state
high school championship titles, to a womens NCAA 500-yard freestyle swimming
event.
     The legislature further finds there
is a dire need to promote sex equality by ensuring that female athletes have a
designated space to compete against other females.  While it has become part of a national
conversation, the legislature finds that for this particular issue, the male
and female designation is to mean biological male and biological female,
respectively.
     The purpose of this Act is to require
the designation of separate sex-specific athletic teams or sports.
     SECTION 2.  Chapter 302A, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is
amended by adding three new sections to be appropriately designated and to read
as follows:
     "§302A-     Sex-specific
athletic teams.  (a)  The department shall designate separate
sex-specific athletic teams or sports within interscholastic, intercollegiate,
intramural, and club athletic teams or sports.  These include sports teams sponsored by a
public, primary or secondary school, a public postsecondary institution, or any
school or institution whose students or teams compete against a public school
or public postsecondary institution.  These
teams shall be expressly designated as one of the following based on biological
sex:
     (1)  Males, men, or
boys;
     (2)  Females, women,
or girls; or
     (3)  Coed or mixed.
     (b)  Athletic teams or sports designated for
females, women, or girls shall not be open to students of the male sex.
     (c)  A dispute regarding a student's sex shall be
resolved by the student's school or institution by requesting that the student
provide a health examination and consent form or other statement signed by the
student's personal health care provider that shall verify the student's
biological sex.  The health care provider
may verify the student's biological sex as part of a routine sports physical
examination by relying on only one or more of the following:
     (1)  The student's reproductive
anatomy;
     (2)  The student's
genetic makeup; or
     (3)  The student's
normal endogenously produced testosterone levels.
     (d)  The board shall adopt rules regarding the
receipt and timely resolution of disputes by schools and institutions consistent
with this subsection.
     §302A-     Protection for educational institutions.
 A governmental entity, any licensing
or accrediting organization, or any athletic association or organization shall not
entertain a complaint, open an investigation, or take any other adverse action
against any school or public postsecondary institution for maintaining separate
interscholastic, intercollegiate, intramural, or club athletic teams or sports
for students of the female sex.
     §302A-     Cause
of action, civil remedies.  (a)
 Any student who is deprived of an
athletic opportunity or suffers any direct or indirect harm as a result of a
violation of this section shall have a private cause of action for injunctive
relief, damages, and any other relief available under law against the school or
public postsecondary institution.
     (b)  Any student who is subject to retaliation or
other adverse action by a school, postsecondary institution, or athletic
association or organization as a result of reporting a violation of this
section to an employee or representative of the school, institution, or
athletic association or organization, or to any state or federal agency with
oversight of schools or public postsecondary institutions in the State, shall
have a private cause of action for injunctive relief, damages, and any other
relief available under law against the school, institution, or athletic
association or organization.
     (c)  Any school or public postsecondary institution
that suffers any direct or indirect harm as a result of a violation of this
section shall have a private cause of action for injunctive relief, damages,
and any other relief available under law against the governmental entity,
licensing or accrediting organization, or athletic association or organization.
     (d)  All civil actions brought under this section shall
be initiated within two years after the alleged harm occurred.  Persons or organizations who prevail on a
claim brough under this section shall be entitled to monetary damages,
including for any psychological, emotional, or physical harm suffered,
reasonable attorney fees and costs, and any other appropriate relief."
     SECTION 3.  This Act does not affect rights and duties
that matured, penalties that were incurred, and proceedings that were begun
before its effective date.
     SECTION 4.  If any provision of this Act, or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance, is held invalid, the
invalidity does not affect other provisions or applications of the Act that can
be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end
the provisions of this Act are severable.
     SECTION 5.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 6.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 



INTRODUCED
  BY:


_____________________________




 


 







 


 
Report Title:
Sex-specific
Athletic Teams; School Sports
 
Description:
Creates
the requirement of school sports to designate sex‑specific teams for the
purpose of gender equality.
 
 
 
The summary description
of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is
not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.




 
88R695 MCK-F


 


 

		By: Hefner
H.B. No. 672




 


 



 		
			

A BILL TO BE ENTITLED




 
			

AN ACT




 
			
relating to the definition of child abuse and the prosecution of the 



 
			
criminal offense of abandoning or endangering a child.



 
			
       BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF TEXAS:



 
			
       SECTION 1.  Section 71.004, Family Code, is amended to read 



 
			
as follows:



 
			
       Sec. 71.004.  FAMILY VIOLENCE.  "Family violence" means:



 
			
             (1)  an act by a member of a family or household against 



 
			
another member of the family or household that is intended to result 



 
			
in physical harm, bodily injury, assault, or sexual assault or that 



 
			
is a threat that reasonably places the member in fear of imminent 



 
			
physical harm, bodily injury, assault, or sexual assault, but does 



 
			
not include defensive measures to protect oneself;



 
			
             (2)  abuse, as that term is defined by Sections 



 
			
261.001(1)(A)(iii), (v), (vii), (viii), (ix), (x), (xi), and (xiii)



 
			
[261.001(1)(C), (E), (G), (H), (I), (J), (K), and (M)], by a member 



 
			
of a family or household toward a child of the family or household; 



 
			
or



 
			
             (3)  dating violence, as that term is defined by 



 
			
Section 71.0021.



 
			
       SECTION 2.  Section 261.001, Family Code, is amended by 



 
			
amending Subdivision (1) and adding Subdivision (3-a) to read as 



 
			
follows:



 
			
             (1)  "Abuse":



 
			
                   (A)  includes the following acts or omissions by a 



 
			
person:



 
			
                         (i) [(A)]  mental or emotional injury to a 



 
			
child that results in an observable and material impairment in the 



 
			
child's growth, development, or psychological functioning;



 
			
                         (ii) [(B)]  causing or permitting the child 



 
			
to be in a situation in which the child sustains a mental or 



 
			
emotional injury that results in an observable and material 



 
			
impairment in the child's growth, development, or psychological 



 
			
functioning;



 
			
                         (iii) [(C)]  physical injury that results in 



 
			
substantial harm to the child, or the genuine threat of substantial 



 
			
harm from physical injury to the child, including an injury that is 



 
			
at variance with the history or explanation given and excluding an 



 
			
accident or reasonable discipline by a parent, guardian, or 



 
			
managing or possessory conservator that does not expose the child 



 
			
to a substantial risk of harm;



 
			
                         (iv) [(D)]  failure to make a reasonable 



 
			
effort to prevent an action by another person that results in 



 
			
physical injury that results in substantial harm to the child;



 
			
                         (v) [(E)]  sexual conduct harmful to a 



 
			
child's mental, emotional, or physical welfare, including conduct 



 
			
that constitutes the offense of continuous sexual abuse of young 



 
			
child or disabled individual under Section 21.02, Penal Code, 



 
			
indecency with a child under Section 21.11, Penal Code, sexual 



 
			
assault under Section 22.011, Penal Code, or aggravated sexual 



 
			
assault under Section 22.021, Penal Code;



 
			
                         (vi) [(F)]  failure to make a reasonable 



 
			
effort to prevent sexual conduct harmful to a child;



 
			
                         (vii) [(G)]  compelling or encouraging the 



 
			
child to engage in sexual conduct as defined by Section 43.01, Penal 



 
			
Code, including compelling or encouraging the child in a manner 



 
			
that constitutes an offense of trafficking of persons under Section 



 
			
20A.02(a)(7) or (8), Penal Code, solicitation of prostitution under 



 
			
Section 43.021, Penal Code, or compelling prostitution under 



 
			
Section 43.05(a)(2), Penal Code;



 
			
                         (viii) [(H)]  causing, permitting, 



 
			
encouraging, engaging in, or allowing the photographing, filming, 



 
			
or depicting of the child if the person knew or should have known 



 
			
that the resulting photograph, film, or depiction of the child is 



 
			
obscene as defined by Section 43.21, Penal Code, or pornographic;



 
			
                         (ix) [(I)]  the current use by a person of a 



 
			
controlled substance as defined by Chapter 481, Health and Safety 



 
			
Code, in a manner or to the extent that the use results in physical, 



 
			
mental, or emotional injury to a child;



 
			
                         (x) [(J)]  causing, expressly permitting, 



 
			
or encouraging a child to use a controlled substance as defined by 



 
			
Chapter 481, Health and Safety Code;



 
			
                         (xi) [(K)]  causing, permitting, 



 
			
encouraging, engaging in, or allowing a sexual performance by a 



 
			
child as defined by Section 43.25, Penal Code;



 
			
                         (xii) [(L)]  knowingly causing, permitting, 



 
			
encouraging, engaging in, or allowing a child to be trafficked in a 



 
			
manner punishable as an offense under Section 20A.02(a)(5), (6), 



 
			
(7), or (8), Penal Code, or the failure to make a reasonable effort 



 
			
to prevent a child from being trafficked in a manner punishable as 



 
			
an offense under any of those sections; [or]



 
			
                         (xiii) [(M)]  forcing or coercing a child to 



 
			
enter into a marriage;



 
			
                         (xiv)  administering or supplying, or 



 
			
consenting to or assisting in the administration or supply of, a 



 
			
puberty suppression prescription drug or cross-sex hormone to a 



 
			
child, other than an intersex child, for the purpose of gender 



 
			
transitioning or gender reassignment; or



 
			
                         (xv)  performing or consenting to the 



 
			
performance of surgery or another medical procedure on a child, 



 
			
other than an intersex child, for the purpose of gender 



 
			
transitioning or gender reassignment; and 



 
			
                   (B)  does not include an act described by 



 
			
Subparagraph (xiv) if the act is the dispensing or delivery of a 



 
			
drug in accordance with Subtitle J, Title 3, Occupations Code, by a 



 
			
person licensed under that subtitle.



 
			
             (3-a)  "Intersex child" means a child who is younger 



 
			
than 18 years of age and either:



 
			
                   (A)  has inborn chromosomal, gonadal, genital, or 



 
			
endocrine characteristics, or a combination of those 



 
			
characteristics, that are not suited to the typical definition of 



 
			
male or female or are atypical for the determined sex of the child; 



 
			
or



 
			
                   (B)  is considered by a medical professional to 



 
			
have inborn chromosomal, gonadal, genital, or endocrine 



 
			
characteristics that are ambiguous or atypical for the determined 



 
			
sex of the child.



 
			
       SECTION 3.  Section 22.041, Penal Code, is amended by 



 
			
amending Subsections (a) and (c-1) and adding Subsections (c-2) and 



 
			
(c-3) to read as follows:



 
			
       (a)  In this section:



 
			
             (1)  "Abandon"[, "abandon"] means to leave a child in 



 
			
any place without providing reasonable and necessary care for the 



 
			
child, under circumstances under which no reasonable, similarly 



 
			
situated adult would leave a child of that age and ability.



 
			
             (2)  "Intersex child" means a child who is younger than 



 
			
15 years of age and either:



 
			
                   (A)  has inborn chromosomal, gonadal, genital, or 



 
			
endocrine characteristics, or a combination of those 



 
			
characteristics, that are not suited to the typical definition of 



 
			
male or female or are atypical for the determined sex of the child; 



 
			
or



 
			
                   (B)  is considered by a medical professional to 



 
			
have inborn chromosomal, gonadal, genital, or endocrine 



 
			
characteristics that are ambiguous or atypical for the determined 



 
			
sex of the child.



 
			
       (c-1)  For purposes of Subsection (c), it is presumed that a 



 
			
person engaged in conduct that places a child in imminent danger of 



 
			
death, bodily injury, or physical or mental impairment if:



 
			
             (1)  the person manufactured, possessed, or in any way 



 
			
introduced into the body of any person the controlled substance 



 
			
methamphetamine in the presence of the child;



 
			
             (2)  the person's conduct related to the proximity or 



 
			
accessibility of the controlled substance methamphetamine to the 



 
			
child and an analysis of a specimen of the child's blood, urine, or 



 
			
other bodily substance indicates the presence of methamphetamine in 



 
			
the child's body; [or]



 
			
             (3)  the person injected, ingested, inhaled, or 



 
			
otherwise introduced a controlled substance listed in Penalty Group 



 
			
1, Section 481.102, Health and Safety Code, or Penalty Group 1-B, 



 
			
Section 481.1022, Health and Safety Code, into the human body when 



 
			
the person was not in lawful possession of the substance as defined 



 
			
by Section 481.002(24) of that code;



 
			
             (4)  the person administers or supplies, or consents to 



 
			
or assists in the administering or supplying of, a puberty 



 
			
suppression prescription drug or cross-sex hormone to a child for 



 
			
the purpose of gender transitioning or gender reassignment; or



 
			
             (5)  the person performs or consents to the performance 



 
			
of surgery or another medical procedure on a child for the purpose 



 
			
of gender transitioning or gender reassignment.



 
			
       (c-2)  The presumptions provided by Subsections (c-1)(4) and 



 
			
(5) do not apply to conduct described by those subsections that 



 
			
involves an intersex child.



 
			
       (c-3)  The presumption provided by Subsection (c-1)(4) does 



 
			
not apply to conduct described by that subsection if the conduct is 



 
			
the dispensing or delivery of a drug in accordance with Subtitle J, 



 
			
Title 3, Occupations Code, by a person licensed under that 



 
			
subtitle.



 
			
       SECTION 4.  The changes in law made by this Act apply only to 



 
			
an offense committed on or after the effective date of this Act.  An 



 
			
offense committed before the effective date of this Act is governed 



 
			
by the law in effect on the date the offense was committed, and the 



 
			
former law is continued in effect for that purpose.  For purposes of 



 
			
this section, an offense was committed before the effective date of 



 
			
this Act if any element of the offense occurred before that date.



 
			
       SECTION 5.  This Act takes effect September 1, 2023.





 
88R2452 SRA-D


 


 

		By: Hughes
S.B. No. 476




 


 



 		
			

A BILL TO BE ENTITLED




 
			

AN ACT




 
			
relating to the definition of sexually oriented business.



 
			
       BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF TEXAS:



 
			
       SECTION 1.  Section 102.051, Business & Commerce Code, is 



 
			
amended to read as follows:



 
			
       Sec. 102.051.  DEFINITIONS.  In this subchapter:



 
			
             (1)  "Drag performance" has the meaning assigned by 



 
			
Section 243.002, Local Government Code.



 
			
             (1-a) "Nude" means:



 
			
                   (A)  entirely unclothed; or



 
			
                   (B)  clothed in a manner that leaves uncovered or 



 
			
visible through less than fully opaque clothing any portion of the 



 
			
breasts below the top of the areola of the breasts, if the person is 



 
			
female, or any portion of the genitals or buttocks.



 
			
             (2)  "Sexually oriented business" means a nightclub, 



 
			
bar, restaurant, or similar commercial enterprise that:



 
			
                   (A)  provides for an audience of two or more 



 
			
individuals:



 
			
                         (i)  live nude entertainment or live nude 



 
			
performances; or



 
			
                         (ii)  a drag performance; and



 
			
                   (B)  authorizes on-premises consumption of 



 
			
alcoholic beverages, regardless of whether the consumption of 



 
			
alcoholic beverages is under a license or permit issued under the 



 
			
Alcoholic Beverage Code.



 
			
       SECTION 2.  Section 243.002, Local Government Code, is 



 
			
amended to read as follows:



 
			
       Sec. 243.002.  DEFINITIONS [DEFINITION].  In this chapter:



 
			
             (1)  "Drag performance" means a performance in which a 



 
			
performer exhibits a gender identity that is different than the 



 
			
performer's gender assigned at birth using clothing, makeup, or 



 
			
other physical markers and sings, lip syncs, dances, or otherwise 



 
			
performs before an audience for entertainment.



 
			
             (2)  "Sexually [, "sexually] oriented business" means:



 
			
                   (A)  a sex parlor, nude studio, modeling studio, 



 
			
love parlor, adult bookstore, adult movie theater, adult video 



 
			
arcade, adult movie arcade, adult video store, adult motel, or 



 
			
other commercial enterprise the primary business of which is the 



 
			
offering of a service or the selling, renting, or exhibiting of 



 
			
devices or any other items intended to provide sexual stimulation 



 
			
or sexual gratification to the customer; or



 
			
                   (B)  a nightclub, bar, restaurant, or other 



 
			
commercial enterprise that provides for an audience of two or more 



 
			
individuals a drag performance.



 
			
       SECTION 3.  This Act takes effect September 1, 2023.





 
88R1978 MCK-F


 


 

		By: Slaton
H.B. No. 42




 


 



 		
			

A BILL TO BE ENTITLED




 
			

AN ACT




 
			
relating to the definition of child abuse.



 
			
       BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF TEXAS:



 
			
       SECTION 1.  Section 71.004, Family Code, is amended to read 



 
			
as follows:



 
			
       Sec. 71.004.  FAMILY VIOLENCE.  "Family violence" means:



 
			
             (1)  an act by a member of a family or household against 



 
			
another member of the family or household that is intended to result 



 
			
in physical harm, bodily injury, assault, or sexual assault or that 



 
			
is a threat that reasonably places the member in fear of imminent 



 
			
physical harm, bodily injury, assault, or sexual assault, but does 



 
			
not include defensive measures to protect oneself;



 
			
             (2)  abuse, as that term is defined by Sections 



 
			
261.001(1)(A)(iii), (v), (vii), (viii), (ix), (x), (xi), and (xiii)



 
			
[261.001(1)(C), (E), (G), (H), (I), (J), (K), and (M)], by a member 



 
			
of a family or household toward a child of the family or household; 



 
			
or



 
			
             (3)  dating violence, as that term is defined by 



 
			
Section 71.0021.



 
			
       SECTION 2.  Section 261.001, Family Code, is amended by 



 
			
amending Subdivision (1) and adding Subdivisions (3-a) and (3-b) to 



 
			
read as follows:



 
			
             (1)  "Abuse":



 
			
                   (A)  includes the following acts or omissions by a 



 
			
person:



 
			
                         (i) [(A)]  mental or emotional injury to a 



 
			
child that results in an observable and material impairment in the 



 
			
child's growth, development, or psychological functioning;



 
			
                         (ii) [(B)]  causing or permitting the child 



 
			
to be in a situation in which the child sustains a mental or 



 
			
emotional injury that results in an observable and material 



 
			
impairment in the child's growth, development, or psychological 



 
			
functioning;



 
			
                         (iii) [(C)]  physical injury that results in 



 
			
substantial harm to the child, or the genuine threat of substantial 



 
			
harm from physical injury to the child, including an injury that is 



 
			
at variance with the history or explanation given and excluding an 



 
			
accident or reasonable discipline by a parent, guardian, or 



 
			
managing or possessory conservator that does not expose the child 



 
			
to a substantial risk of harm;



 
			
                         (iv) [(D)]  failure to make a reasonable 



 
			
effort to prevent an action by another person that results in 



 
			
physical injury that results in substantial harm to the child;



 
			
                         (v) [(E)]  sexual conduct harmful to a 



 
			
child's mental, emotional, or physical welfare, including conduct 



 
			
that constitutes the offense of continuous sexual abuse of young 



 
			
child or disabled individual under Section 21.02, Penal Code, 



 
			
indecency with a child under Section 21.11, Penal Code, sexual 



 
			
assault under Section 22.011, Penal Code, or aggravated sexual 



 
			
assault under Section 22.021, Penal Code;



 
			
                         (vi) [(F)]  failure to make a reasonable 



 
			
effort to prevent sexual conduct harmful to a child;



 
			
                         (vii) [(G)]  compelling or encouraging the 



 
			
child to engage in sexual conduct as defined by Section 43.01, Penal 



 
			
Code, including compelling or encouraging the child in a manner 



 
			
that constitutes an offense of trafficking of persons under Section 



 
			
20A.02(a)(7) or (8), Penal Code, solicitation of prostitution under 



 
			
Section 43.021, Penal Code, or compelling prostitution under 



 
			
Section 43.05(a)(2), Penal Code;



 
			
                         (viii) [(H)]  causing, permitting, 



 
			
encouraging, engaging in, or allowing the photographing, filming, 



 
			
or depicting of the child if the person knew or should have known 



 
			
that the resulting photograph, film, or depiction of the child is 



 
			
obscene as defined by Section 43.21, Penal Code, or pornographic;



 
			
                         (ix) [(I)]  the current use by a person of a 



 
			
controlled substance as defined by Chapter 481, Health and Safety 



 
			
Code, in a manner or to the extent that the use results in physical, 



 
			
mental, or emotional injury to a child;



 
			
                         (x) [(J)]  causing, expressly permitting, 



 
			
or encouraging a child to use a controlled substance as defined by 



 
			
Chapter 481, Health and Safety Code;



 
			
                         (xi) [(K)]  causing, permitting, 



 
			
encouraging, engaging in, or allowing a sexual performance by a 



 
			
child as defined by Section 43.25, Penal Code;



 
			
                         (xii) [(L)]  knowingly causing, permitting, 



 
			
encouraging, engaging in, or allowing a child to be trafficked in a 



 
			
manner punishable as an offense under Section 20A.02(a)(5), (6), 



 
			
(7), or (8), Penal Code, or the failure to make a reasonable effort 



 
			
to prevent a child from being trafficked in a manner punishable as 



 
			
an offense under any of those sections; or



 
			
                         (xiii) [(M)]  forcing or coercing a child to 



 
			
enter into a marriage;



 
			
                   (B)  subject to Paragraph (C), includes the 



 
			
following acts by a medical professional or mental health 



 
			
professional for the purpose of attempting to change or affirm a 



 
			
child's perception of the child's sex, if that perception is 



 
			
inconsistent with the child's biological sex as determined by the 



 
			
child's sex organs, chromosomes, and endogenous hormone profiles:



 
			
                         (i)  performing a surgery that sterilizes 



 
			
the child, including castration, vasectomy, hysterectomy, 



 
			
oophorectomy, metoidioplasty, orchiectomy, penectomy, 



 
			
phalloplasty, and vaginoplasty;



 
			
                         (ii)  performing a mastectomy;



 
			
                         (iii)  administering or supplying any of the 



 
			
following medications that induce transient or permanent 



 
			
infertility:



 
			
                               (a)  puberty-blocking medication to 



 
			
stop or delay normal puberty;



 
			
                               (b)  supraphysiologic doses of 



 
			
testosterone to females; or



 
			
                               (c)  supraphysiologic doses of 



 
			
estrogen to males; or



 
			
                         (iv)  removing any otherwise healthy or 



 
			
non-diseased body part or tissue; and



 
			
                   (C)  does not include an act described by 



 
			
Paragraph (B) performed on a child born with a medically verifiable 



 
			
genetic disorder of sex development, including:



 
			
                         (i)  a child with external biological sex 



 
			
characteristics that are irresolvably ambiguous, including a child 



 
			
born having:



 
			
                               (a)  46, XX chromosomes with 



 
			
virilization;



 
			
                               (b)  46, XY chromosomes with 



 
			
undervirilization; or



 
			
                               (c)  both ovarian and testicular 



 
			
tissue; or



 
			
                         (ii)  a child who does not have the normal 



 
			
sex chromosome structure for a male or female as determined by a 



 
			
physician through genetic testing.



 
			
             (3-a)  "Medical professional" means a physician, 



 
			
physician assistant, or advanced practice registered nurse 



 
			
licensed to practice in this state.



 
			
             (3-b)  "Mental health professional" means an 



 
			
individual who is licensed to practice in this state as a 



 
			
psychologist, psychiatrist, social worker, marriage and family 



 
			
therapist, mental health counselor, or educational psychologist or 



 
			
any other individual designated or licensed under state law as a 



 
			
mental health or behavioral science professional.



 
			
       SECTION 3.  This Act takes effect September 1, 2023.




MISSISSIPPI LEGISLATURE
2023 Regular Session
To: Judiciary, Division A
By: Senator(s) Tate, Hill
Senate Bill 2770
AN ACT TO PROHIBIT GENDER REASSIGNMENT SURGERY FROM BEING
PERFORMED UPON A MINOR; TO STATE LEGISLATIVE INTENT; TO DEFINE TERMS; TO CRIMINALIZE
ANY PERSON THAT PERFORMS A GENDER REASSIGNMENT SURGERY UPON A MINOR FOR THE PURPOSE
OF ASSISTING A MINOR WITH A GENDER TRANSITION; TO PROVIDE CRIMINAL PENALTIES; TO
PROVIDE THAT THE PERFORMANCE OF A GENDER REASSIGNMENT SURGERY UPON A MINOR BY A
MEDICAL PROFESSIONAL SHALL BE UNPROFESSIONAL CONDUCT; TO REQUIRE A MEDICAL
PROFESSIONAL'S LICENSING OR CERTIFYING BOARD TO REVOKE THE LICENSURE OF THE
MEDICAL PROFESSIONAL IF IT WAS DETERMINED THAT A GENDER REASSIGNMENT SURGERY
WAS PERFORMED UPON A MINOR; TO PROVIDE A CIVIL PENALTY FOR ANY MEDICAL
PROFESSIONAL WHO PERFORMS A GENDER REASSIGNMENT SURGERY UPON A MINOR; TO PROVIDE
A GOOD-FAITH EXCEPTION FOR A MINOR BORN WITH A MEDICALLY VERIFIABLE GENETIC
DISORDER OF SEXUAL DEVELOPMENT; TO PROVIDE A PRIVATE CAUSE OF ACTION FOR
VIOLATIONS OF THIS ACT; TO PROVIDE THAT THE PROVISIONS OF THIS ACT ARE
SEVERABLE; AND FOR RELATED PURPOSES.
     BE IT ENACTED BY THE
LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF MISSISSIPPI:
     SECTION 1.  (1) 
The Legislature finds:
          (a)  That the decision
to pursue gender reassignment surgery to address a discordance between an
individual's sex and sense of identity should not be performed on minors who
are incapable of comprehending the negative implications and life-altering
difficulties attending to these procedures; and
          (b)  That minors are
unable to fully appreciate the risks and life implications, including permanent
sterility that result from surgical procedures.
     (2)  Therefore, it is the
intent of the Mississippi Legislature, through this act and any regulations and
policies promulgated under it, to protect minors from gender reassignment surgery.
     SECTION 2.  For
the purpose of this act, the following terms shall have the meaning ascribed to
them herein unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
          (a)  "Gender
reassignment surgery" means any medical or surgical service that seeks to
surgically alter or remove healthy physical or anatomical characteristics or
features that are typical for the individual's biological sex in order to
instill or create physiological or anatomical characteristics that resemble a
sex different from the individual's biological sex, including without
limitation, genital or nongenital gender reassignment surgery performed for the
purpose of assisting an individual with a gender transition.  "Gender reassignment
surgery" may include, but is not limited to, the following procedures:
               (i)  A mastectomy;
or
               (ii)  A surgery that
sterilizes, including:
                    1.  A
castration;
                    2.  A vasectomy;
                    3.  A hysterectomy;

                    4.  An oophorectomy;

                    5.  A metoidioplasty;
                    6.  An orchiectomy;
                    7.  A penectomy;
                    8.  A phalloplasty;
and
                    9.  A vaginoplasty.
          (b)  "Gender
transition" means the process in which a person goes from identifying with
and living as a gender that corresponds to his or her biological sex to
identifying with and living as a gender different from his or her biological
sex, and may involve social, legal or physical changes.
          (c)  "Medical
professional" means any physician, surgeon, physician assistant, nurse,
clinical nurse specialist, nurse practitioner, anesthetist, psychiatrist or
medical assistant licensed under Mississippi law.
          (d)  "Minor"
means any child below the age of twenty-one (21).
          (e)  "Sex"
means the biological state of being female or male, based on sex organs,
chromosomes and endogenous hormone profiles.
     SECTION 3. 
(1)  A person is guilty of performing a gender reassignment surgery upon a minor
if he purposely, knowingly or recklessly performs, attempts to perform, or causes
to be performed a gender reassignment surgery upon a minor for the purpose of
assisting the minor with a gender transition.
     (2)  Upon conviction, the defendant
is guilty of a felony punishable by a fine of not more than Ten Thousand Dollars
($10,000.00) or by a term of no less than five (5) years nor more than fifteen (15)
years in the custody of the Mississippi Department of Corrections, or both.
     (3)  Upon conviction, if the
defendant was a medical professional at the time of the offense, the defendant shall
be subject to an enhanced penalty in addition to the penalties provided in subsection
(2) of this section of a fine of not more than Fifteen Thousand Dollars ($15,000.00)
or by a term of not less than five (5) years nor more than ten (10) years in the
custody of the Mississippi Department of Corrections, or both.
     SECTION 4.  (1)
 A medical professional who performs, attempts to perform, or causes to be performed
a gender reassignment surgery upon a minor for the purpose of assisting an
individual with a gender transition shall be considered to have engaged in
unprofessional conduct.  After a hearing, the medical professional's licensing
or certifying board shall revoke the licensure of the medical professional if it
was determined that a gender reassignment surgery was performed, was attempted
to be performed or was caused to be performed upon a minor for the purpose of assisting
an individual with a gender transition.
     (2)  The medical
professional shall also be subject to a civil fine of not more than Five
Thousand Dollars ($5,000.00) per occurrence.
     (3)  The hearing and civil fine
required by this section shall not be contingent on the criminal arrest of the medical
professional or the initiation of criminal proceedings against the medical professional.
     SECTION 5.  Sections
3 and 4 of this act do not apply to the good-faith medical decision of a parent
or guardian of a minor born with a medically verifiable genetic disorder of
sexual development or any medical procedure performed as a result of that good-faith
medical decision, including:
          (a)  A minor with
external biological sex characteristics that are ambiguous and irresolvable,
such as a minor born having 46 XX chromosomes with virilization, 46 XY
chromosomes with undervirilization, or having both ovarian and testicular
tissue; or
          (b)  When a physician
has otherwise diagnosed a disorder of sexual development, in which the
physician has determined through genetic testing that the minor does not have
the normal sex chromosome structure for a male or female.
     SECTION 6.  (1)
 Any person harmed by a violation of this act may bring a claim to obtain
injunctive relief, compensatory and punitive damages, and any other relief
available under law against a government agent, state office, agency, any
political subdivision of the state, any local government or any other person or
entity responsible for the violation.
     (2)  A civil action brought
under this act may be commenced no later than two (2) years after the day the
cause of action accrues.  If any person entitled to bring any action under this
chapter shall, at the time at which the cause of action accrued, be under the
disability of infancy or unsoundness of mind, he may bring the action within twenty
(20) years after his disability shall be removed as provided by law.  The
savings in favor of persons under disability of unsoundness of mind shall never
extend longer than forty-one (41) years.
     SECTION 7.  This act shall
be severable as provided in Section 1-3-77.
     SECTION 8.  This act
shall take effect and be in force from and after July 1, 2023.




 



 


 

		By: Slawson
H.B. No. 888




 


 



 		
			

A BILL TO BE ENTITLED




 
			

AN ACT




 
			
relating to the statute of limitations on a health care liability 



 
			
claim involving certain gender modification drugs provided to and 



 
			
procedures performed on a minor.



 
			
       BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF TEXAS:



 
			
       SECTION 1.  Section 74.251, Civil Practice and Remedies 



 
			
Code, is amended to read as follows:



 
			
       Sec. 74.251.  GENERAL STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS AND REPOSE ON 



 
			
HEALTH CARE LIABILITY CLAIMS.  (a)  Notwithstanding any other law, 



 
			
except as provided by Section 74.252, and subject to Subsection 



 
			
(b), no health care liability claim may be commenced unless the 



 
			
action is filed within two years from the occurrence of the breach 



 
			
or tort or from the date the medical or health care treatment that 



 
			
is the subject of the claim or the hospitalization for which the 



 
			
claim is made is completed; provided that, minors under the age of 



 
			
12 years shall have until their 14th birthday in which to file, or 



 
			
have filed on their behalf, the claim.  Except as herein provided 



 
			
this section applies to all persons regardless of minority or other 



 
			
legal disability.



 
			
       (b)  Except for a health care liability claim described by 



 
			
Section 74.252, a [A] claimant must bring a health care liability 



 
			
claim not later than 10 years after the date of the act or omission 



 
			
that gives rise to the claim.  This subsection is intended as a 



 
			
statute of repose so that all claims must be brought within 10 years 



 
			
or they are time barred.



 
			
       SECTION 2.  Subchapter F, Chapter 74, Civil Practice and 



 
			
Remedies Code, is amended by adding Section 74.252 to read as 



 
			
follows:



 
			
       Sec. 74.252.  STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS ON HEALTH CARE 



 
			
LIABILITY CLAIMS INVOLVING CERTAIN GENDER MODIFICATION DRUGS AND 



 
			
PROCEDURES.  A claimant must bring a health care liability claim not 



 
			
later than the claimant's 25th birthday if:



 
			
             (1)  the claimant is a minor at the time the cause of 



 
			
action accrues; and



 
			
             (2)  the basis for the claim is malpractice in the 



 
			
provision of a puberty suppression prescription drug or cross-sex 



 
			
hormone to or the performance of surgery or another medical 



 
			
procedure on the minor for the purpose of gender transitioning or 



 
			
gender reassignment.



 
			
       SECTION 3.  The changes in law made by this Act apply only to 



 
			
a cause of action that accrues on or after the effective date of 



 
			
this Act.



 
			
       SECTION 4.  This Act takes effect September 1, 2023.





 
88R3483 EAS-D


 


 

		By: Hall, Campbell, Perry
S.B. No. 250




 


 



 		
			

A BILL TO BE ENTITLED




 
			

AN ACT




 
			
relating to the provision of and professional liability insurance 



 
			
coverage for gender transitioning or gender reassignment medical 



 
			
procedures and treatments for certain children.



 
			
       BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF TEXAS:



 
			
       SECTION 1.  Chapter 161, Health and Safety Code, is amended 



 
			
by adding Subchapter X to read as follows:



 
			
SUBCHAPTER X.  GENDER TRANSITIONING AND GENDER REASSIGNMENT 



 
			
PROCEDURES AND TREATMENTS FOR CERTAIN CHILDREN



 
			
       Sec. 161.701.  DEFINITIONS.  In this subchapter:



 
			
             (1)  "Child" means an individual who is younger than 18 



 
			
years of age.



 
			
             (2)  "Health care provider" means a person other than a 



 
			
physician who is licensed, certified, or otherwise authorized by 



 
			
this state's laws to provide or render health care or to dispense or 



 
			
prescribe a prescription drug in the ordinary course of business or 



 
			
practice of a profession.



 
			
             (3)  "Physician" means a person licensed to practice 



 
			
medicine in this state.



 
			
       Sec. 161.702.  PROHIBITED PROVISION OF GENDER TRANSITIONING 



 
			
OR GENDER REASSIGNMENT PROCEDURES AND TREATMENTS TO CERTAIN 



 
			
CHILDREN.  For the purpose of transitioning a child's biological 



 
			
sex as determined by the sex organs, chromosomes, and endogenous 



 
			
profiles of the child or affirming the child's perception of the 



 
			
child's sex if that perception is inconsistent with the child's 



 
			
biological sex, a physician or health care provider may not:



 
			
             (1)  perform a surgery that sterilizes the child, 



 
			
including:



 
			
                   (A)  castration;



 
			
                   (B)  vasectomy;



 
			
                   (C)  hysterectomy;



 
			
                   (D)  oophorectomy;



 
			
                   (E)  metoidioplasty;



 
			
                   (F)  orchiectomy;



 
			
                   (G)  penectomy;



 
			
                   (H)  phalloplasty; and



 
			
                   (I)  vaginoplasty;



 
			
             (2)  perform a mastectomy;



 
			
             (3)  prescribe, administer, or supply any of the 



 
			
following medications that induce transient or permanent 



 
			
infertility:



 
			
                   (A)  puberty-blocking medication to stop or delay 



 
			
normal puberty;



 
			
                   (B)  supraphysiologic doses of testosterone to 



 
			
females; or



 
			
                   (C)  supraphysiologic doses of estrogen to males; 



 
			
or



 
			
             (4)  remove any otherwise healthy or non-diseased body 



 
			
part or tissue.



 
			
       Sec. 161.703.  EXCEPTIONS.  Section 161.702 does not apply 



 
			
to the provision by a physician or health care provider, with the 



 
			
consent of the child's parent or legal guardian, of appropriate and 



 
			
medically necessary gender transitioning or gender reassignment 



 
			
procedures or treatments to a child who:



 
			
             (1)  is born with a medically verifiable genetic 



 
			
disorder of sex development, including:



 
			
                   (A)  46,XX chromosomes with virilization;



 
			
                   (B)  46,XY chromosomes with undervirilization; or



 
			
                   (C)  both ovarian and testicular tissue; or



 
			
             (2)  does not have the normal sex chromosome structure 



 
			
for male or female as determined by a physician through genetic 



 
			
testing.



 
			
       Sec. 161.704.  DISCIPLINARY ACTION.  The Texas Medical Board 



 
			
or another state regulatory agency with jurisdiction over a health 



 
			
care provider subject to Section 161.702 shall revoke the license, 



 
			
certification, or authorization of a physician or health care 



 
			
provider who the board or agency determines has violated that 



 
			
section.



 
			
       SECTION 2.  Subchapter F, Chapter 1901, Insurance Code, is 



 
			
amended by adding Section 1901.256 to read as follows:



 
			
       Sec. 1901.256.  PROHIBITED COVERAGE FOR PROVISION OF CERTAIN 



 
			
GENDER-RELATED PROCEDURES AND TREATMENTS TO CERTAIN CHILDREN.  A 



 
			
professional liability insurance policy issued to a physician or 



 
			
health care provider may not include coverage for damages assessed 



 
			
against the physician or health care provider who provides to a 



 
			
child gender transitioning or gender reassignment procedures or 



 
			
treatments that are prohibited by Section 161.702, Health and 



 
			
Safety Code.



 
			
       SECTION 3.  Section 1901.256, Insurance Code, as added by 



 
			
this Act, applies only to a medical professional liability 



 
			
insurance policy that is delivered, issued for delivery, or renewed 



 
			
on or after the effective date of this Act.  An insurance policy 



 
			
that is delivered, issued for delivery, or renewed before the 



 
			
effective date of this Act is governed by the law in effect 



 
			
immediately before the effective date of this Act, and that law is 



 
			
continued in effect for that purpose.



 
			
       SECTION 4.  This Act takes effect immediately if it receives 



 
			
a vote of two-thirds of all the members elected to each house, as 



 
			
provided by Section 39, Article III, Texas Constitution.  If this 



 
			
Act does not receive the vote necessary for immediate effect, this 



 
			
Act takes effect September 1, 2023.




SENATE, No. 585 

STATE OF NEW JERSEY
220th LEGISLATURE
  
PRE-FILED FOR INTRODUCTION IN THE 2022 SESSION
 




 
Sponsored by:
Senator  MICHAEL L. TESTA, JR.
District 1 (Atlantic, Cape May and Cumberland)
Senator  STEVEN V. OROHO
District 24 (Morris, Sussex and Warren)
 
Co-Sponsored by:
Senators Doherty and Pennacchio
 
 
 
 
SYNOPSIS
     Provides that public school parent who objects to
learning material or activity that parent considers harmful may receive voucher
from school district to enroll student in nonpublic school. 
 
CURRENT VERSION OF TEXT 
     Introduced Pending Technical Review by Legislative
Counsel.
   




An Act concerning vouchers for certain public school students
and supplementing chapter 35 of Title 18A of the New Jersey Statutes.
 
     Be It
Enacted by the Senate and General Assembly of
the State of New Jersey:
 
     1.    In the event that the
parent or guardian of a student enrolled in a school district objects to a
learning material or activity that is part of the curriculum, on the basis that
the material or activity is harmful, withdraws his child from the school
district and enrolls the child in a nonpublic school, the resident school
district shall provide the parent or guardian with a voucher to support the
tuition and fees of the nonpublic school.  The voucher shall equal 75 percent
of the resident school district's annual spending per pupil prorated based upon
the number of days remaining in the school year.
     An objection to a learning
material or activity on the basis that it is harmful includes, but is not
limited to, an objection that the material or activity questions, violates, or
conflicts with the parent or guardian's belief or practice regarding sex,
sexuality, sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, conscience,
ethics, morality, or religion.
 
     2.    This act shall take
effect immediately.
 
 
STATEMENT
 
     This bill provides that in the
event that the parent or guardian of a student enrolled in a school district
objects to a learning material or activity that is part of the curriculum, on
the basis that the material or activity is harmful, withdraws his child from
the school district and enrolls the child in a nonpublic school, the resident
school district is required to provide the parent or guardian with a voucher to
support the tuition and fees of the nonpublic school.  The voucher will equal
75 percent of the resident school district's annual spending per pupil prorated
based upon the number of days remaining in the school year.
     An objection to a learning
material or activity on the basis that it is harmful includes, but is not
limited to, an objection that the material or activity questions, violates, or
conflicts with the parent or guardian's belief or practice regarding sex,
sexuality, sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, conscience,
ethics, morality, or religion.







2023-2024 Bill 3485 Text of Previous Version (Dec. 08, 2022) - South Carolina Legislature Online
 

South Carolina General Assembly125th Session, 2023-2024Bill 3485Indicates Matter StrickenIndicates New Matter(Text matches printed bills. Document has been reformatted to meet World Wide Web specifications.)








A bill

to amend the south carolina code of laws by enacting the "families' rights and responsibilities act" by adding chapter 23 to title 63 so as to recognize that parents have the ultimate responsibility to direct the upbringing, education, health care, and mental health of their children; to set forth certain rights and responsibilities; to require local school boards of trustees to take certain actions to promote parental involvement; to require medical providers to obtain parental consent before providing health care services to a child of the parent, with exceptions; to create a cause of action for violation of the chapter; and for other purposes; and to amend section 59-28-160, relating to local school boards of trustees, so as to make conforming changes.

Be it enacted by the General Assembly of the State of South Carolina:

SECTION 1. This act shall be known and may be cited as the "Families' Rights and Responsibilities Act".

SECTION 2.Title 63 of the S.C. Code is amended by adding:

CHAPTER 23

Families' Rights and Responsibilities Act

Section 63-23-10.For the purposes of the chapter:
(1) "Child" means a person under the age of eighteen.
(2) "Parent" means any biological parent, adoptive parent, step parent, legal guardian, or person with legal custody that has not been terminated by a court order.
(3) "Substantial burden" means any action that directly or indirectly constrains, inhibits, curtails, or denies the right of a parent to direct the upbringing, education, health care, and mental health of that parent's child or compels any action contrary to the right of a parent to direct the upbringing, education, health care, and mental health of that parent's child. It includes, but is not limited to, withholding benefits, assessing criminal, civil, or administrative penalties or damages, or exclusion from governmental programs.

Section 63-23-20.(A) The liberty of a parent to direct the upbringing, education, health care, and mental health of that parent's child is a fundamental right.
(B) This State, any political subdivision of this State, or any other governmental entity shall not substantially burden the fundamental right of a parent to direct the upbringing, education, health care, and mental health of that parent's child without demonstrating that the burden is required by a compelling governmental interest of the highest order as applied to the parent and the child and is the least restrictive means of furthering that compelling governmental interest.

Section 63-23-30.(A) South Carolina recognizes that parents have the responsibility to direct the upbringing, education, health care, and mental health of that parent's child. To fulfill that responsibility, the State recognizes that all parental rights are exclusively reserved to a parent of a child without obstruction by or interference from this State, any political subdivision of this State, any other governmental entity, or any other institution including, without limitation, the following rights and responsibilities:
(1) to direct the education of the child, including the right to choose public, private, religious, or home schools;
(2) to make reasonable choices within public schools for the education of the child including, but not limited to, the right to participate in the children's school activities and extracurricular activities as provided in Sections 59-1-454 and 63-15-260;
(3) to access and review all school records relating to the child, including the rights provided in Sections 63-5-30 and 63-15-260;
(4) to direct the upbringing of the child;
(5) to direct the moral or religious training of the child; 
(6) to make and consent in writing to all physical and mental health care decisions for the child; 
(7) to access and review all medical records of the child, including the rights provided in Sections 63-5-30 and 63-15-260; 
(8) to consent in writing before a biometric scan of the child is made, shared, or stored; 
(9) to consent in writing before any record of the child's blood or deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) is created, stored, or shared, unless authorized pursuant to a court order; 
(10) to consent in writing before any governmental entity makes a video or voice recording of the child, unless the video or voice recording is made during or as a part of:
(a) a court proceeding;
(b) a law enforcement investigation;
(c) a forensic interview in a criminal or Department of Social Services investigation;
(d) the security or surveillance of buildings or grounds; or
(e) a photo identification card;
(11) to be notified promptly if an employee of this State, any political subdivision of this State, any other governmental entity, or any other institution suspects that abuse, neglect, or any criminal offense has been committed against the child by someone other than a parent, unless the incident has first been reported to law enforcement and notification of the parent would impede a law enforcement or Department of Social Services investigation.
(B) This section does not authorize or allow a parent to abuse or neglect a child as defined in Section 63-7-20. This section does not apply to a parental action or decision that would end life. This section does not prohibit a court from issuing an order that is otherwise permitted by law.
(C) No employee of this State, any political subdivision of this State, or any other governmental entity, except for law enforcement personnel, shall encourage or coerce a child to withhold information from the child's parent. Nor shall any such employee withhold from a child's parent information that is relevant to the physical, emotional, or mental health of the child. Such conduct is grounds for discipline of the employee, in addition to any other remedies provided to a parent under this chapter.

Section 63-23-40.(A) Each local school board of trustees, in consultation with parents, teachers, and administrators, shall develop and adopt a policy to promote the involvement of parents of children enrolled in the schools within the school district, which shall be made publicly available. This policy shall include:
(1) a plan for participation of parents in the schools which is designed to improve parent and teacher cooperation in such areas as homework, attendance, and discipline;
(2) procedures by which a parent may learn about the course of study for that parent's child and review all educational and learning materials, including the source of any supplemental educational materials, no less than thirty days before the materials are taught or presented;
(3) procedures by which a parent who objects to any specific instruction or presentation on the basis that it is harmful may withdraw that parent's child from the instruction or presentation. Objection to a specific instruction or presentation on the basis that it is harmful includes, but it is not limited to, objection to a material or activity because it questions beliefs or practices regarding sex, morality, or religion;
(4) procedures to notify a parent in advance and obtain the parent's written consent before the parent's child attends any instruction or presentation concerning reproductive health, family life, and pregnancy prevention pursuant to Section 59-32-50 or any instruction or presentation that has the goal or purpose of studying, exploring, or informing students about gender roles or stereotypes, gender identity, gender expression, sexual orientation, or romantic or sexual relationships, and by which a parent may withdraw that parent's child from any such instruction or presentation to which the parent subsequently objects; 
(5) procedures by which a parent may learn about the nature and purpose of clubs and extracurricular activities that have been approved by the school and may withdraw that parent's child from any club or extracurricular activities to which the parent objects; and
(6) procedures by which a parent may learn about parental rights and responsibilities under the laws of this State.
(B) A local school board of trustees may adopt a policy to provide to parents the information required by this section in an electronic form.
(C) A parent may submit a written or electronic request for information pursuant to this section to either the school principal or the superintendent of the school district. Within ten days of receiving the request for information, the school principal or the superintendent shall either deliver the requested information to the parent or submit to the parent a written explanation of the reasons for the denial of the requested information. If the request for information is denied or the parent does not receive the requested information within fifteen days after submitting the request for information, the parent may submit a written request for the information to the local school board of trustees, which shall formally consider the request at the next scheduled public meeting of the board if the request can be properly noticed on the agenda. If the request cannot be properly noticed on the agenda, the local school board of trustees shall formally consider the request at the subsequent public meeting of the board.

Section 63-23-50.(A) Except as otherwise provided by law or court order, any person, corporation, association, organization, state supported institution, state agency, political subdivision of the State, or individual employed by any of these entities must obtain the consent of a parent of a child before taking any of the following actions:
(1) procuring, soliciting to perform, arranging for the performance of, providing a referral for, or performing surgical procedures upon a child;
(2) procuring, soliciting to perform, arranging for the performance of, providing a referral for, or performing a physical examination upon a child;
(3) prescribing or dispensing any medication or prescription drugs to a child;
(4) administering a vaccination, immunization, or biologic to a child; or
(5) procuring, soliciting to perform, arranging for the performance of, providing a referral for, or performing a mental health evaluation in a clinical or nonclinical setting or mental health treatment on a child.
(B) If the parental consent pursuant to subsection (A) is given through telemedicine, the person or entity obtaining parental consent must verify the identity of the parent at the site where the consent is given.
(C) The provisions of this section shall not apply when it has been determined by a physician that:
(1) an emergency exists; and
(2) either of the following conditions is true:
(a) it is necessary to perform an activity listed in subsection (A) in order to prevent death or imminent, irreparable physical injury to the child; or
(b) a parent of the child cannot be located or contacted after a reasonably diligent effort.
(D) The provisions of this section do not apply to an abortion, which shall be governed by Chapter 41, Title 44.

Section 63-23-60.(A) A parent may bring suit for any violation of this chapter and may raise the chapter as a defense in any judicial or administrative proceeding without regard to whether the proceeding is brought by or in the name of the state government, any private person, or any other party.
(B) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, an action under this chapter may be commenced, and relief may be granted, without regard to whether the person commencing the action has sought or exhausted available administrative remedies.
(C) Any person who successfully asserts a claim or defense under this chapter may recover declaratory relief, injunctive relief, compensatory damages, reasonable attorneys' fees and costs, and any other appropriate relief; provided, however, that compensatory damages are not available against a private person who is not acting in an official capacity as a representative of the state government.
(D) Sovereign, governmental, and qualified immunities to suit and from liability are waived and abolished to the extent of liability created by this chapter.

Section 63-23-70.(A) Unless those rights have been legally waived or legally terminated, parents have inalienable rights that are more comprehensive than those listed in this section. The protections of the fundamental right of parents to direct the upbringing, education, health care, and mental health of their child afforded by this chapter are in addition to the protections provided under federal law, state law, and the state and federal constitutions.
(B) This chapter shall be construed in favor of a broad protection of the fundamental right of parents to direct the upbringing, education, health care, and mental health of their child.
(C) Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to authorize any government to burden the fundamental right of parents to direct the upbringing, education, health care, and mental health of their child.
(D) If a child has no affirmative right of access to a particular medical treatment, then nothing in this chapter shall be construed to grant that child's parent an affirmative right of access to that treatment on that child's behalf.
(E) State statutory law adopted after the date of the enactment of this chapter is subject to this chapter unless such law explicitly excludes such application by reference to this chapter.

SECTION 3.Section 59-28-160 (6) and (7) of the S.C. Code is amended to read:

(6) require an annual briefing on district and school parental involvement programs including findings from state and local evaluations on the success of the district and schools' efforts; and
(7) include parental involvement expectations as part of the superintendent's evaluation; and
(8) comply with the requirements of Section 63-23-40.

SECTION 4.The repeal or amendment by this act of any law, whether temporary or permanent or civil or criminal, does not affect pending actions, rights, duties, or liabilities founded thereon, or alter, discharge, release or extinguish any penalty, forfeiture, or liability incurred under the repealed or amended law, unless the repealed or amended provision shall so expressly provide.  After the effective date of this act, all laws repealed or amended by this act must be taken and treated as remaining in full force and effect for the purpose of sustaining any pending or vested right, civil action, special proceeding, criminal prosecution, or appeal existing as of the effective date of this act, and for the enforcement of rights, duties, penalties, forfeitures, and liabilities as they stood under the repealed or amended laws.

SECTION 5.If any section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, clause, phrase, or word of this act is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid, such holding shall not affect the constitutionality or validity of the remaining portions of this act, the General Assembly hereby declaring that it would have passed this act, and each and every section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, clause, phrase, and word thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more other sections, subsections, paragraphs, subparagraphs, sentences, clauses, phrases, or words hereof may be declared to be unconstitutional, invalid, or otherwise ineffective.

SECTION 6.This act takes effect upon approval by the Governor.
----XX----
This web page was last updated on December 08, 2022 at 07:30 PM





MISSISSIPPI LEGISLATURE
2023 Regular Session
To: Judiciary B
By: Representative Shanks
House Bill 1480
AN ACT TO ESTABLISH THE "PARENTS' BILL OF RIGHTS ACT OF
2023"; TO DEFINE TERMINOLOGY USED HEREIN; TO ESTABLISH THAT A PARENT'S
LIBERTY TO DIRECT THE UPBRINGING, EDUCATION, HEALTH CARE AND MENTAL HEALTH OF
HIS OR HER CHILD IS A FUNDAMENTAL RIGHT; TO PROHIBIT THE STATE OR ANY POLITICAL
SUBDIVISION THEREOF FROM SUBSTANTIALLY BURDENING A PARENT'S FUNDAMENTAL RIGHT
WITHOUT DEMONSTRATING THAT THE BURDEN IS REQUIRED BY A COMPELLING GOVERNMENTAL
INTEREST; TO PROVIDE THAT ALL PARENTAL RIGHTS ARE EXCLUSIVELY RESERVED TO A
PARENT OF A CHILD WITHOUT OBSTRUCTION BY OR INTERFERENCE FROM THE STATE OR ANY
POLITICAL SUBDIVISION THEREOF; TO PROVIDE THAT ABUSE OR NEGLECT OF A CHILD BY A
PARENT OR THE ACTION OR DECISION OF A PARENT THAT WOULD END LIFE ARE NOT AUTHORIZED
BY THIS ACT; TO PROHIBIT EMPLOYEES OF THIS STATE AND ANY POLITICAL SUBDIVISION
THEREOF, EXCEPT FOR LAW ENFORCEMENT PERSONNEL, FROM ENCOURAGING OR COERCING A
CHILD TO WITHHOLD INFORMATION FROM THE CHILD'S PARENT; TO FURTHER PROHIBIT SUCH
EMPLOYEES FROM WITHHOLDING INFORMATION THAT IS RELEVANT TO A CHILD'S PHYSICAL,
EMOTIONAL OR MENTAL HEALTH FROM A CHILD'S PARENT; TO REQUIRE THE BOARD OF
EDUCATION OF A SCHOOL DISTRICT TO DEVELOP AND ADOPT A POLICY TO PROMOTE THE
INVOLVEMENT OF PARENTS OF CHILDREN ENROLLED IN THE DISTRICT'S SCHOOLS; TO
PRESCRIBE THE MINIMUM REQUIREMENT PROCEDURES TO BE ADDRESSED BY THE POLICY; TO
PROVIDE THE BOARD OF EDUCATION OF A SCHOOL DISTRICT WITH THE DISCRETION TO
ADOPT A POLICY TO PROVIDE TO PARENTS THE INFORMATION IN AN ELECTRONIC FORM; TO
REQUIRE PARENTS TO SUBMIT A WRITTEN OR ELECTRONIC REQUEST FOR THE CHILD'S
INFORMATION TO THE SCHOOL PRINCIPAL OR THE SUPERINTENDENT OF THE SCHOOL
DISTRICT; TO REQUIRE THE SCHOOL PRINCIPAL OR SUPERINTENDENT TO PROVIDE THE
REQUESTED INFORMATION TO THE PARENTS WITHIN TEN DAYS OF RECEIVING THE REQUEST,
OR SUBMIT TO THE PARENT A WRITTEN EXPLANATION OF THE REASONS FOR THE DENIAL OF
THE REQUESTED INFORMATION; TO PRESCRIBE THE PROCESS BY WHICH A PARENT MAY
SUBMIT A FORMAL CONSIDERATION OF THE REQUEST OF INFORMATION WITH THE SCHOOL
BOARD IF THE REQUESTED INFORMATION IS NOT RECEIVED FIVE DAYS AFTER SUBMITTING
THE INITIAL REQUEST; TO ESTABLISH A CAUSE OF ACTION FOR VIOLATION OF THIS ACT; TO
PROVIDE THAT THIS ACT SHALL SERVE AS A DEFENSE TO ANY CAUSE OF ACTION THAT IS RAISED
AS A RESULT OF A VIOLATION THEREOF; TO PROVIDE THAT THE RULES OF CONSTRUCTION SHALL
PROVIDE BROAD PROTECTION OF A PARENT'S FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS AS INALIENABLE UNLESS
THOSE RIGHTS HAVE BEEN LEGALLY WAIVED OR LEGALLY TERMINATED; TO AMEND SECTION
37-3-49, MISSISSIPPI CODE OF 1972, TO PROVIDE THE PARENT OF EACH PUBLIC SCHOOL
STUDENT WITH THE RIGHT TO RECEIVE EFFECTIVE COMMUNICATION FROM THE SCHOOL
PRINCIPAL AS TO THE MANNER IN WHICH INSTRUCTIONAL MATERIALS ARE USED TO
IMPLEMENT THE SCHOOL'S CURRICULAR OBJECTIVES; TO AMEND SECTION 37-13-173,
MISSISSIPPI CODE OF 1972, TO PROVIDE PARENTS THE AUTHORITY TO OPT THEIR
CHILDREN OUT OF ANY INSTRUCTION OF THE SCHOOL DISTRICT'S COMPREHENSIVE HEALTH
EDUCATION RELATING TO SEX EDUCATION UPON SUBMITTING A WRITTEN REQUEST TO THE
SCHOOL PRINCIPAL; TO AMEND SECTION 37-15-3, MISSISSIPPI CODE OF 1972, TO
PROVIDE THAT STUDENT AND PARENTAL RIGHTS TO EDUCATION RECORDS CREATED, MAINTAINED,
OR USED BY PUBLIC EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS AND AGENCIES SHALL BE PROTECTED; TO STIPULATE
THAT STUDENTS AND THEIR PARENTS MAINTAIN THE RIGHT TO ACCESS THE STUDENT'S EDUCATIONAL
RECORDS, WAIVE ACCESS TO SUCH RECORDS, CHALLENGE THE CONTENT OF SUCH RECORDS, PRIVACY
OF SUCH RECORDS AND TO RECEIVE ANNUAL NOTICE OF THE RIGHTS TO SUCH RECORDS; TO
BRING FORWARD SECTIONS 37-7-301, 37-13-171 AND 43-21-105, MISSISSIPPI CODE OF
1972, FOR PURPOSES OF POSSIBLE AMENDMENTS; AND FOR RELATED PURPOSES.
     BE IT ENACTED BY THE
LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF MISSISSIPPI:
     SECTION 1.  This
act shall be known and may be cited as the "Parents' Bill of Rights Act of
2023."
     SECTION 2.  As
used in this act, the following terms shall have the meaning ascribed in this section
unless context of usage requires otherwise:
          (a)  "Child"
means an individual under the age of eighteen (18).  The term does not include any
child who has been adjudicated as a legally emancipated minor in accordance with
state law by a court of competent jurisdiction.
          (b)  "Curriculum"
includes all textbooks, reading materials, handouts, videos, presentations,
digital materials, websites, online applications, digital applications for a
phone, laptop or tablet, questionnaires, surveys, or other written or
electronic materials that have been or will be assigned, distributed or
otherwise presented physically or virtually to students in a class or course.
          (c)  "Educational
records" includes attendance records, test scores of school-administered
tests and state-wide assessments, grades, extracurricular activity or club
participation, e-mail accounts, online or virtual accounts or data,
disciplinary records, counseling records, psychological records, applications
for admission, health and immunization information including any medical
records maintained by a health clinic or medical facility operated or
controlled by the school district or located on district property, teacher and
counselor evaluations, and reports of behavioral patterns.
          (d)  "Parent"
means a biological parent of a child, an adoptive parent of a child, or an
individual who has been granted exclusive right, guardianship and authority
over the welfare of a child under state law.
          (f)  "Parent"
means a biological parent of a child, an adoptive parent of a child, or an
individual who has been granted exclusive right and authority over the welfare
of a child under state law.
          (g)  "Sex"
means biological sex based on chromosomal structure and anatomy at birth.
          (h)  "Substantial
burden" means any action that directly or indirectly constrains, inhibits,
curtails, or denies the right of a parent to direct the upbringing, education,
health care and mental health of that parent's child, or compels any action
contrary to the right of a parent to direct the upbringing, education, health
care and mental health of that parent's child. The term includes, but is not
limited to, withholding benefits, assessing criminal, civil or administrative
penalties or damages, or exclusion from governmental assistance programs.
          (i)  "Syllabus"
means a written description of all topics and subjects taught in a class or
course, and shall include a list of all curriculum used in the class or course,
the identity of all individuals providing in-person or live remote instruction
in the class or course, and a description of any assemblies, guest lectures,
field trips or other educational activities that are part of the class or
course.
          (j)  "Teacher
training materials" means any presentations, videos, professional
development classes or other educational or training activities, including any
written or electronic materials used or distributed in the activities, that a
teacher is required to attend by a public school.
     SECTION 3.  Parental
Rights are Fundamental.
     (1)  The Legislature finds
that parents have a liberty interest, more precious than any property interest,
in the care, custody and management of their children and that these parental
rights are a matter of fundamental constitutional significance. These rights
include, but are not limited to, the liberty of parents to direct the
upbringing, education, health care, and mental health of that parent's child.  The
Legislature further finds that important information relating to a child should
not be withheld, either inadvertently or purposefully, from his or her parent,
including information relating to the child's health, well-being, and
education, while the child is in the custody of the school district or charter
school.  The Legislature further finds it is necessary to establish a
consistent mechanism for parents to be notified of information relating to the health
and well-being of their children.
     (2)  This state, any political
subdivision of this state, any other governmental entity, any governing body,
or any officer, employee or agent thereof shall not substantially burden the
fundamental right of a parent to direct the upbringing, education, health care,
and mental health of that parent's child without demonstrating that the burden
is required by a compelling governmental interest as applied to the parent and
the child and is the least restrictive means of furthering that compelling
governmental interest.
     SECTION 4.  Rights
and Responsibilities.
     (1)  All parental rights are
exclusively reserved to a parent of a child without substantial burden by or
interference from this state, any political subdivision of this state, any
other governmental entity or any other institution, including without limitation,
the following rights and responsibilities:
          (a)  To direct the
education of the child, including the right to choose public, private,
religious or home schools, and the right to make reasonable choices within
public schools for the education of the child;
          (b)  To access and
review all written and electronic educational records relating to the child
that are controlled by or in the possession of a school, including, but not limited
to:
              (i)  Attendance
records;
              (ii)  Test scores
of school-administered tests and state-wide assessments;
              (iii) Grades;
              (iv)  Extracurricular
activity or club participation;
              (v)  Their child's
e-mail accounts;
              (vi)  Their child's
online or virtual accounts or data;
              (vii)  Disciplinary
records;
              (viii)  Counseling
records;
              (ix)  Psychological
records;
              (x)  Applications
for admission;
              (xi)  Health and
immunization information, including any medical records maintained by a health
clinic or medical facility operated or controlled by the school district or
located on district property;
              (xii)  Teacher and
counselor evaluations; and
              (xiii)  Reports of
behavioral patterns.
          (c)  To direct the
upbringing of the child;
          (d)  To direct the moral
or religious training of the child;
          (e)  To make and
consent in writing to all physical and mental health care decisions for the
child;
          (f)  To access and
review all health and medical records of the child;
          (g)  To consent in
writing before a biometric scan of the child is made, shared or stored;
          (h)  To consent in writing
before any record of the child's blood or deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) is created,
stored or shared, unless authorized pursuant to a court order;
          (i)  To consent in
writing before any governmental entity makes a video or voice recording of the
child, unless the video or voice recording is made during or as a part of:
               (i)  A court
proceeding;
               (ii)  A law
enforcement investigation;
               (iii)  A forensic
interview in a criminal or Department of Child Protection Services
investigation;
               (iv)  The security
or surveillance of buildings or grounds; or
               (v)  A photo
identification card;
          (j)  To be notified
promptly if an employee of this state, any political subdivision of this state,
any other governmental entity or any other institution suspects that abuse, neglect
or any criminal offense has been committed against the child.  This paragraph
does not create any new obligation for school districts and charter schools to
report misconduct between students at school, such as fighting or aggressive
play, which is routinely addressed pursuant to school disciplinary procedures;
          (k)  To opt the child
out of any personal analysis, evaluation, survey or data collection by a school
district that would capture data for inclusion in the state longitudinal student
data system except what is necessary and essential to establish a student's
educational record;
          (l)  The right to have
the child excused from school attendance for religious purposes; and
          (m)  The right to
participate in parent-teacher associations and school organizations that are
sanctioned by the board of education of a school district.
     (2)  This section does not
and shall not be construed to:
          (a)  Authorize or allow
a parent to abuse or neglect a child as defined in Section 43-21-105;
          (b)  Apply to a
parental action or decision that would end life;
          (c)  Prohibit a court
of competent jurisdiction from issuing an order that is otherwise permitted by
law; or
          (d)  Prohibit a judge
or officer of a court of competent jurisdiction, law enforcement or any agent
of the Department of Child Protective Services from acting within his or her
official capacity within the reasonable and prudent scope of his or her
authority.
     (3)  No employee of this
state, any political subdivision of this state, or any other governmental
entity, except for law enforcement personnel, shall encourage or coerce a child
to withhold information from the child's parent.  Nor shall any such employee
withhold from a child's parent information that is relevant to the physical,
emotional or mental health of the child or any information regarding the child's
curricular or extracurricular projects, assignments or activities.
     (4)  Any employee of the
state, any of its political subdivisions, or any other governmental entity,
other than law enforcement personnel, who encourages or coerces, or attempts to
encourage or coerce, a child to withhold information from his or her parent may
be subject to disciplinary action.
     SECTION 5.  Educational
Involvement.
     (1)  The board of education
of a school district, in consultation with parents, teachers and
administrators, shall develop and adopt a policy to promote the involvement of
parents of children enrolled in the schools within the school district,
including:
          (a)  A plan for parent
participation in the schools which is designed to improve parent and teacher
cooperation in such areas as homework, attendance and discipline;
          (b)  Procedures by
which a parent may learn about the course of study for that parent's child and
review all curriculum. These procedures shall allow a parent to:
               (i)  Review a
syllabus for each class or course that the parent's child is enrolled in at
least seven (7) days before the start of each class or course;
               (ii)  Review all
curriculum for each class or course offered by the school and any teacher
training materials at least three (3) days before the curriculum or materials
being taught or used for instruction is presented to students in a format that
conspicuously identifies the added curriculum;
               (iii)  Copy and
record information from the curriculum and teacher training materials;
              (iv)  Review of all
supplemental educational materials including the source, sponsor, and funding
for such materials; and
               (v)  Meet with the
teacher of the class or course, the principal, or other representative from the
school to discuss the curriculum and teaching training materials.
          (c)  Procedures by
which a parent who objects to any specific instruction or presentation may
withdraw that parent's child from the instruction or presentation on the basis
that such material or activity questions beliefs or practices regarding sex,
morality, or religion.  And that the school district or charter school may not
impose an academic or other penalty upon a child who is withdrawn pursuant to
this section.  This section shall not exempt a child from satisfying grade-level
or graduation requirements;
          (d)  Procedures by
which a parent may learn about the nature and purpose of clubs and
extracurricular activities that have been approved by the school and may
withdraw that parent's child from any club or extracurricular to which the
parent objects;
          (e)  Procedures by
which a parent must provide written consent before a school district or charter
school or any employee or agent thereof provides, procures, solicits, arranges
for the performance of, provides a referral for, or performs any mental health counselling
or treatment of that parent's child;
          (f)  Procedures by which
a parent must provide written consent before their child uses a name or
nickname other than their legal name, or before a child uses a pronoun that
does not align with the child's sex;
          (g)  Procedures by
which a parent may learn about parental rights and responsibilities under the
laws of this state; and
          (h)  Procedures by
which parents are made aware of the rights under the Family Educational Rights
and Privacy Act (FERPA) 20 USCS Section 1232g, and regulations promulgated
thereunder relating to parents' access to their children's official records.
     (2)  The parental rights and
the procedures provided herein do not and shall be construed to:
          (a)  Compel officers,
administrators, employees, teachers, agents or volunteers of any school
district or charter school or students of such school district or charter
school to use pronouns that do not align with a child's sex or to otherwise
infringe upon such person's sincerely held religious belief even if that
child's parent has provided written consent as provided herein;
          (b)  Permit a child to
use a bathroom, locker room, changing facilities, or overnight lodging
accommodations that does not align with that child's sex, nor require a school
district or charter school to allow or otherwise adopt a policy to permit a
child to use bathrooms, locker rooms, changing facilities, or overnight lodging
accommodations reserved for the opposite sex; or
          (c)  Permit a child to
compete on an interscholastic or intramural athletic team or sport designated
for the opposite sex, which shall be governed by Section 37-97-1 et seq.
     (3)  A school district or
charter school shall publish these procedures required by this section on that
school district or charter school's publicly available website.
     (4)  The board of education
of a school district may adopt a policy to provide to parents the information
required by this section in an electronic form.
     (5)  A parent shall submit a
written or electronic request for information pursuant to this section to
either the school principal or the superintendent of the school district.  Within
five (5) business days of receiving the request for information, the school
principal or the superintendent shall either deliver the requested information
to the parent or submit to the parent a written explanation of the reasons for
the denial of the requested information.  If the request for information is
denied or the parent does not receive the requested information within the
allotted five (5) business days, the parent may submit a written request for
the information to the governing board of the school district or charter
school, which shall formally consider and rule on the request during executive
session at the next meeting of the board.  If it is too late for a parent's
request on the agenda of the next meeting, such request must be included on the
agenda of the subsequent meeting of the governing board.
     (6)  If aggrieved by the
decision of the governing board of the school district or charter school, a
parent may appeal such decision to the Chancery Court of the County in which
the school district or charter school is located.
     SECTION 6.  Cause
of Action.
     (1)  A parent may bring suit
for any violation of this act and may raise the act as a defense in any
judicial or administrative proceeding without regard to whether the proceeding
is brought by or in the name of the state government, any private person or any
other party.
     (2)  Notwithstanding any
other provision of law, an action under this act may be commenced, and relief
may be granted, without regard to whether the person commencing the action has
sought or exhausted available administrative remedies.
     (3)  Any person who
successfully asserts a claim or defense under this act may recover declaratory
relief, injunctive relief to prevent or remedy a violation of this act or the effects
of such violation, compensatory damages, reasonable attorneys' fees and costs,
and any other appropriate relief.
     (4)  Sovereign, governmental
and qualified immunities to suit and from liability are waived and abolished to
the extent of liability created by this act.
     SECTION 7.  Rules
of Construction.
     (1)  Unless those rights
have been legally waived or legally terminated, parents have inalienable rights
that are more comprehensive than those listed in this section.  The protections
of the fundamental right of parents to direct the upbringing, education, health
care and mental health of their child afforded by this act are in addition to
the protections provided under federal law, state law, and the state and federal
constitutions.
     (2)  This act shall be
construed in favor of a broad protection of the fundamental right of parents to
direct the upbringing, education, health care and mental health of their child.
     (3)  Nothing in this act
shall be construed to authorize any government to burden the fundamental right
of parents to direct the upbringing, education, health care and mental health
of their child.
     (4)  If a child has no
affirmative right of access to a particular medical or mental health procedure
or service, then nothing in this act shall be construed to grant that child's
parent an affirmative right of access to that procedure or service on that child's
behalf.
     (5)  Any provision of this
act held to be invalid or unenforceable by its terms, or as applied to any
person or circumstance, shall be construed so as to give it the maximum effect
permitted by law, unless such holding shall be one of utter invalidity or unenforceability,
in which event such provision shall be deemed severable, and shall not affect
the remainder hereof or the application of such provision to other, dissimilar
circumstances.
     SECTION 8.  Section
37-3-49, Mississippi Code of 1972, is amended as follows:
     37-3-49.  (1)  The State
Department of Education shall provide an instructional program and establish
guidelines and procedures for managing such program in the public schools
within the school districts throughout the state as part of the State Program of
Educational Accountability and Assessment of Performance as prescribed in Section
37-3-46.  Public school districts may (a) elect to adopt the instructional
program and management system provided by the State Department of Education, or
(b) elect to adopt an instructional program and management system which meets
or exceeds criteria established by the State Department of Education for such. 
This provision shall begin with the courses taught in Grades K-8 which contain
skills tested through the Mississippi Basic Skills Assessment Program and shall
proceed through all secondary school courses mandated for graduation and all
secondary school courses in the Mississippi end-of-course testing program. 
Other state core objectives must be included in the district's instructional
program as they are provided by the State Department of Education along with
instructional practices, resources, evaluation items and management
procedures.  Districts are encouraged to adapt this program and accompanying
procedures to all other instructional areas.  The department shall provide that
such program and guidelines, or a program and guidelines developed by a local
school district which incorporates the core objectives from the curriculum
structure are enforced through the performance-based accreditation system.  It
is the intent of the Legislature that every effort be made to protect the
instructional time in the classroom and reduce the amount of paperwork which
must be completed by teachers.  The State Department of Education shall take
steps to insure that school districts properly use staff development time to
work on the districts' instructional management plans.
     (2)  The State Department of
Education shall provide such instructional program and management guidelines
which shall require for every public school district that:
          (a)  All courses taught
in Grades K-8 which contain skills which are tested through the Mississippi
Basic Skills Assessment Program, all secondary school courses mandated for
graduation, and all courses in the end-of-course testing program shall include
the State Department of Education's written list of learning objectives.
          (b)  The local school
board must adopt the objectives that will form the core curriculum which will
be systematically delivered throughout the district.
          (c)  The set of
objectives provided by the State Department of Education must be accompanied by
suggested instructional practices and resources that would help teachers
organize instruction so as to promote student learning of the objectives. 
Objectives added by the school district must also be accompanied by suggested
instructional practices and resources that would help teachers organize
instruction.  The instructional practices and resources that are identified are
to be used as suggestions and not as requirements that teachers must follow. 
The goal of the program is to have students to achieve the desired objective
and not to limit teachers in the way they teach.
          (d)  Standards for
student performance must be established for each core objective in the local
program and those standards establish the district's definition of mastery for
each objective.
          (e)  There shall be an
annual review of student performance in the instructional program against
locally established standards.  When weaknesses exist in the local
instructional program, the district shall take action to improve student
performance.
     (3)  The parent of each
public school student has the right to receive effective communication from the
school principal as to the manner in which instructional materials are used to
implement the school's curricular objectives, in accordance with the provisions
of Section 5 of this act.
     ( * * *34)  The State Board of Education and
the board of trustees of each school district shall adopt policies to limit and
reduce the number and length of written reports that classroom teachers are
required to prepare.
     ( * * *45)  This section shall not be construed
to limit teachers from using their own professional skills to help students
master instructional objectives, nor shall it be construed as a call for more detailed
or complex lesson plans or any increase in testing at the local school district
level.
     ( * * *56)  Districts meeting the highest
levels of accreditation standards, as defined by the State Board of Education,
shall be exempted from the provisions of subsection (2) of this section.  
     SECTION 9.  Section
37-13-173, Mississippi Code of 1972, is amended as follows:
     37-13-173.  (1)  Each
school providing instruction or any other presentation on human sexuality in the
classroom, assembly or other official setting shall be required to provide no less
than * * *one (1) week's
three (3) days' written notice thereof to the parents of children in such
programs of instruction.  The written notice must inform the parents of their right
to request the inclusion of their child for such instruction or presentation.  The
notice also must inform the parents of the right, and the appropriate process, to
review the curriculum and all materials to be used in the lesson or presentation.
     (2)  Upon the written
request of any parent or legal guardian to the school principal to exempt his
or her child from the teaching of reproductive health or any disease, including
HIV/AIDS, in accordance with the provisions of Section 37-13-171, the school
shall excuse the parent's child from such instruction or presentation, without detriment
to the student.
     SECTION 10.  Section
37-15-3, Mississippi Code of 1972, is amended as follows:
     37-15-3.  (1) * * *Such The cumulative folders as are provided
for in Section 37-15-1 shall be kept in the school wherein the pupils are in
attendance.  Both the permanent records and the cumulative folders shall be
available to school officials, including teachers within the school district
who have been determined by the school district to have legitimate educational
interests.  In no case, however, shall such records be available to the general
public.
     (2)  The rights of
students and their parents or legal guardians with respect to education records
created, maintained, or used by public educational institutions and agencies
shall be protected.  Transcripts of courses and grades may be furnished
when requested by the parent or guardian or eligible pupil as prescribed in the
Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act of 1974, as amended, 20 USCS Section 1232g,
the implementing regulations issued pursuant thereto, and this section, provided
the following:
          (a)  Students
and their parents shall have the right to access their education records, including
the right to inspect and review those records;
          (b)  Students
and their parents shall have the right to waive their access to their education
records in certain circumstances;
          (c)  Students
and their parents shall have the right to challenge the content of education
records in order to ensure that the records are not inaccurate, misleading or
otherwise a violation of privacy or other rights;
          (d)  Students and
their parents shall have the right of privacy with respect to such records and
reports; and
          (e)  Students
and their parents shall receive annual notice of their rights with respect to
education records.
     (3)  * * *Such The records shall be kept for each
pupil throughout his entire public school enrollment period.  In the event a
pupil transfers to a public school, including a charter school, then the
cumulative folder shall be furnished to the head of the school to which the
pupil transfers; if a pupil transfers to a private school, then a copy of the
cumulative folder shall be furnished to the head of the school to which the
pupil transfers.  The permanent record shall be kept permanently by the school
district from which the pupil transferred.
     (4)  At no time may a
permanent record of a student be destroyed, but cumulative folders may be
destroyed by order of the school board of the school district in not less than
five (5) years after the permanent record of the pupil has become inactive and
has been transferred to the central depository of the district.  * * *Provided, However, * * *that where a school district makes complete
copies of inactive permanent records on photographic film, microfilm * * *, or any other acceptable form of medium for
storage which may be reproduced as needed, * * *such those permanent records may be
destroyed after the photographic film or microfilm copy has been stored in the
central depository of the district.
     SECTION 11.  Section
37-7-301, Mississippi Code of 1972, is brought forward as follows:
     37-7-301.  The school boards
of all school districts shall have the following powers, authority and duties
in addition to all others imposed or granted by law, to wit:
          (a)  To organize and
operate the schools of the district and to make such division between the high
school grades and elementary grades as, in their judgment, will serve the best
interests of the school;
          (b)  To introduce
public school music, art, manual training and other special subjects into
either the elementary or high school grades, as the board shall deem proper;
          (c)  To be the
custodians of real and personal school property and to manage, control and care
for same, both during the school term and during vacation;
          (d)  To have
responsibility for the erection, repairing and equipping of school facilities
and the making of necessary school improvements;
          (e)  To suspend or to
expel a pupil or to change the placement of a pupil to the school district's
alternative school or homebound program for misconduct in the school or on school
property, as defined in Section 37-11-29, on the road to and from school, or at
any school-related activity or event, or for conduct occurring on property
other than school property or other than at a school-related activity or event
when such conduct by a pupil, in the determination of the school superintendent
or principal, renders that pupil's presence in the classroom a disruption to
the educational environment of the school or a detriment to the best interest
and welfare of the pupils and teacher of such class as a whole, and to delegate
such authority to the appropriate officials of the school district;
          (f)  To visit schools
in the district, in their discretion, in a body for the purpose of determining
what can be done for the improvement of the school in a general way;
          (g)  To support, within
reasonable limits, the superintendent, principal and teachers where necessary
for the proper discipline of the school;
          (h)  To exclude from
the schools students with what appears to be infectious or contagious diseases;
provided, however, such student may be allowed to return to school upon presenting
a certificate from a public health officer, duly licensed physician or nurse
practitioner that the student is free from such disease;
          (i)  To require those
vaccinations specified by the State Health Officer as provided in Section 41-23-37;
          (j)  To see that all
necessary utilities and services are provided in the schools at all times when
same are needed;
          (k)  To authorize the use
of the school buildings and grounds for the holding of public meetings and
gatherings of the people under such regulations as may be prescribed by said
board;
          (l)  To prescribe and
enforce rules and regulations not inconsistent with law or with the regulations
of the State Board of Education for their own government and for the government
of the schools, and to transact their business at regular and special meetings
called and held in the manner provided by law;
          (m)  To maintain and
operate all of the schools under their control for such length of time during
the year as may be required;
          (n)  To enforce in the
schools the courses of study and the use of the textbooks prescribed by the proper
authorities;
          (o)  To make orders
directed to the superintendent of schools for the issuance of pay certificates for
lawful purposes on any available funds of the district and to have full control
of the receipt, distribution, allotment and disbursement of all funds provided
for the support and operation of the schools of such school district whether
such funds be derived from state appropriations, local ad valorem tax collections,
or otherwise.  The local school board shall be authorized and empowered to
promulgate rules and regulations that specify the types of claims and set
limits of the dollar amount for payment of claims by the superintendent of
schools to be ratified by the board at the next regularly scheduled meeting
after payment has been made;
          (p)  To select all
school district personnel in the manner provided by law, and to provide for
such employee fringe benefit programs, including accident reimbursement plans, as
may be deemed necessary and appropriate by the board;
          (q)  To provide athletic
programs and other school activities and to regulate the establishment and
operation of such programs and activities;
          (r)  To join, in their
discretion, any association of school boards and other public school-related
organizations, and to pay from local funds other than minimum foundation funds,
any membership dues;
          (s)  To expend local
school activity funds, or other available school district funds, other than
minimum education program funds, for the purposes prescribed under this paragraph. 
"Activity funds" shall mean all funds received by school officials in
all school districts paid or collected to participate in any school activity,
such activity being part of the school program and partially financed with
public funds or supplemented by public funds.  The term "activity funds"
shall not include any funds raised and/or expended by any organization unless
commingled in a bank account with existing activity funds, regardless of
whether the funds were raised by school employees or received by school
employees during school hours or using school facilities, and regardless of
whether a school employee exercises influence over the expenditure or
disposition of such funds.  Organizations shall not be required to make any
payment to any school for the use of any school facility if, in the discretion
of the local school governing board, the organization's function shall be deemed
to be beneficial to the official or extracurricular programs of the school. 
For the purposes of this provision, the term "organization" shall not
include any organization subject to the control of the local school governing
board.  Activity funds may only be expended for any necessary expenses or travel
costs, including advances, incurred by students and their chaperons in attending
any in-state or out-of-state school-related programs, conventions or seminars
and/or any commodities, equipment, travel expenses, purchased services or
school supplies which the local school governing board, in its discretion,
shall deem beneficial to the official or extracurricular programs of the
district, including items which may subsequently become the personal property
of individuals, including yearbooks, athletic apparel, book covers and
trophies.  Activity funds may be used to pay travel expenses of school district
personnel.  The local school governing board shall be authorized and empowered
to promulgate rules and regulations specifically designating for what purposes
school activity funds may be expended.  The local school governing board shall
provide (i) that such school activity funds shall be maintained and expended by
the principal of the school generating the funds in individual bank accounts,
or (ii) that such school activity funds shall be maintained and expended by the
superintendent of schools in a central depository approved by the board.  The
local school governing board shall provide that such school activity funds be
audited as part of the annual audit required in Section 37-9-18.  The State
Department of Education shall prescribe a uniform system of accounting and
financial reporting for all school activity fund transactions;
          (t)  To enter into an
energy performance contract, energy services contract, on a shared-savings,
lease or lease-purchase basis, for energy efficiency services and/or equipment
as provided for in Section 31-7-14;
          (u)  To maintain
accounts and issue pay certificates on school food service bank accounts;
          (v)  (i)  To lease a
school building from an individual, partnership, nonprofit corporation or a
private for-profit corporation for the use of such school district, and to
expend funds therefor as may be available from any nonminimum program sources. 
The school board of the school district desiring to lease a school building
shall declare by resolution that a need exists for a school building and that
the school district cannot provide the necessary funds to pay the cost or its proportionate
share of the cost of a school building required to meet the present needs.  The
resolution so adopted by the school board shall be published once each week for
three (3) consecutive weeks in a newspaper having a general circulation in the
school district involved, with the first publication thereof to be made not
less than thirty (30) days prior to the date upon which the school board is to
act on the question of leasing a school building.  If no petition requesting an
election is filed prior to such meeting as hereinafter provided, then the school
board may, by resolution spread upon its minutes, proceed to lease a school
building.  If at any time prior to said meeting a petition signed by not less
than twenty percent (20%) or fifteen hundred (1500), whichever is less, of the
qualified electors of the school district involved shall be filed with the
school board requesting that an election be called on the question, then the
school board shall, not later than the next regular meeting, adopt a resolution
calling an election to be held within such school district upon the question of
authorizing the school board to lease a school building.  Such election shall
be called and held, and notice thereof shall be given, in the same manner for
elections upon the questions of the issuance of the bonds of school districts,
and the results thereof shall be certified to the school board.  If at least
three-fifths (3/5) of the qualified electors of the school district who voted
in such election shall vote in favor of the leasing of a school building, then
the school board shall proceed to lease a school building.  The term of the
lease contract shall not exceed twenty (20) years, and the total cost of such
lease shall be either the amount of the lowest and best bid accepted by the
school board after advertisement for bids or an amount not to exceed the
current fair market value of the lease as determined by the averaging of at
least two (2) appraisals by certified general appraisers licensed by the State
of Mississippi.  The term "school building" as used in this paragraph
(v)(i) shall be construed to mean any building or buildings used for classroom
purposes in connection with the operation of schools and shall include the site
therefor, necessary support facilities, and the equipment thereof and
appurtenances thereto such as heating facilities, water supply, sewage
disposal, landscaping, walks, drives and playgrounds.  The term "lease"
as used in this paragraph (v)(i) may include a lease-purchase contract;
              (ii)  If two (2) or
more school districts propose to enter into a lease contract jointly, then
joint meetings of the school boards having control may be held but no action
taken shall be binding on any such school district unless the question of leasing
a school building is approved in each participating school district under the
procedure hereinabove set forth in paragraph (v)(i).  All of the provisions of
paragraph (v)(i) regarding the term and amount of the lease contract shall
apply to the school boards of school districts acting jointly.  Any lease contract
executed by two (2) or more school districts as joint lessees shall set out the
amount of the aggregate lease rental to be paid by each, which may be agreed
upon, but there shall be no right of occupancy by any lessee unless the
aggregate rental is paid as stipulated in the lease contract.  All rights of
joint lessees under the lease contract shall be in proportion to the amount of
lease rental paid by each;
          (w)  To employ all
noninstructional and noncertificated employees and fix the duties and compensation
of such personnel deemed necessary pursuant to the recommendation of the
superintendent of schools;
          (x)  To employ and fix
the duties and compensation of such legal counsel as deemed necessary;
          (y)  Subject to rules
and regulations of the State Board of Education, to purchase, own and operate
trucks, vans and other motor vehicles, which shall bear the proper
identification required by law;
          (z)  To expend funds
for the payment of substitute teachers and to adopt reasonable regulations for
the employment and compensation of such substitute teachers;
          (aa)  To acquire in its
own name by purchase all real property which shall be necessary and desirable
in connection with the construction, renovation or improvement of any public
school building or structure.  Whenever the purchase price for such real
property is greater than Fifty Thousand Dollars ($50,000.00), the school board
shall not purchase the property for an amount exceeding the fair market value
of such property as determined by the average of at least two (2) independent
appraisals by certified general appraisers licensed by the State of
Mississippi.  If the board shall be unable to agree with the owner of any such
real property in connection with any such project, the board shall have the power
and authority to acquire any such real property by condemnation proceedings
pursuant to Section 11-27-1 et seq., Mississippi Code of 1972, and for such
purpose, the right of eminent domain is hereby conferred upon and vested in
said board.  Provided further, that the local school board is authorized to
grant an easement for ingress and egress over sixteenth section land or lieu
land in exchange for a similar easement upon adjoining land where the exchange
of easements affords substantial benefit to the sixteenth section land;
provided, however, the exchange must be based upon values as determined by a
competent appraiser, with any differential in value to be adjusted by cash
payment.  Any easement rights granted over sixteenth section land under such authority
shall terminate when the easement ceases to be used for its stated purpose.  No
sixteenth section or lieu land which is subject to an existing lease shall be burdened
by any such easement except by consent of the lessee or unless the school district
shall acquire the unexpired leasehold interest affected by the easement;
          (bb)  To charge
reasonable fees related to the educational programs of the district, in the
manner prescribed in Section 37-7-335;
          (cc)  Subject to rules
and regulations of the State Board of Education, to purchase relocatable
classrooms for the use of such school district, in the manner prescribed in
Section 37-1-13;
          (dd)  Enter into contracts
or agreements with other school districts, political subdivisions or
governmental entities to carry out one or more of the powers or duties of the
school board, or to allow more efficient utilization of limited resources for
providing services to the public;
          (ee)  To provide for in-service
training for employees of the district;
          (ff)  As part of their
duties to prescribe the use of textbooks, to provide that parents and legal
guardians shall be responsible for the textbooks and for the compensation to
the school district for any books which are not returned to the proper schools
upon the withdrawal of their dependent child.  If a textbook is lost or not
returned by any student who drops out of the public school district, the parent
or legal guardian shall also compensate the school district for the fair market
value of the textbooks;
          (gg)  To conduct fund-raising
activities on behalf of the school district that the local school board, in its
discretion, deems appropriate or beneficial to the official or extracurricular
programs of the district; provided that:
              (i)  Any proceeds of
the fund-raising activities shall be treated as "activity funds" and
shall be accounted for as are other activity funds under this section; and
              (ii)  Fund-raising
activities conducted or authorized by the board for the sale of school
pictures, the rental of caps and gowns or the sale of graduation invitations
for which the school board receives a commission, rebate or fee shall contain a
disclosure statement advising that a portion of the proceeds of the sales or
rentals shall be contributed to the student activity fund;
          (hh)  To allow
individual lessons for music, art and other curriculum-related activities for
academic credit or nonacademic credit during school hours and using school
equipment and facilities, subject to uniform rules and regulations adopted by
the school board;
          (ii)  To charge
reasonable fees for participating in an extracurricular activity for academic
or nonacademic credit for necessary and required equipment such as safety equipment,
band instruments and uniforms;
          (jj)  To conduct or
participate in any fund-raising activities on behalf of or in connection with a
tax-exempt charitable organization;
          (kk)  To exercise such
powers as may be reasonably necessary to carry out the provisions of this
section;
          (ll)  To expend funds for
the services of nonprofit arts organizations or other such nonprofit organizations
who provide performances or other services for the students of the school
district;
          (mm)  To expend federal
No Child Left Behind Act funds, or any other available funds that are expressly
designated and authorized for that use, to pay training, educational expenses,
salary incentives and salary supplements to employees of local school districts;
except that incentives shall not be considered part of the local supplement as defined
in Section 37-151-5(o), nor shall incentives be considered part of the local
supplement paid to an individual teacher for the purposes of Section 37-19-7(1). 
Mississippi Adequate Education Program funds or any other state funds may not
be used for salary incentives or salary supplements as provided in this paragraph
(mm);
          (nn)  To use any
available funds, not appropriated or designated for any other purpose, for
reimbursement to the state-licensed employees from both in state and out of
state, who enter into a contract for employment in a school district, for the
expense of moving when the employment necessitates the relocation of the
licensed employee to a different geographical area than that in which the
licensed employee resides before entering into the contract.  The reimbursement
shall not exceed One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) for the documented actual
expenses incurred in the course of relocating, including the expense of any
professional moving company or persons employed to assist with the move, rented
moving vehicles or equipment, mileage in the amount authorized for county and
municipal employees under Section 25-3-41 if the licensed employee used his
personal vehicle or vehicles for the move, meals and such other expenses
associated with the relocation.  No licensed employee may be reimbursed for moving
expenses under this section on more than one (1) occasion by the same school
district.  Nothing in this section shall be construed to require the actual
residence to which the licensed employee relocates to be within the boundaries
of the school district that has executed a contract for employment in order for
the licensed employee to be eligible for reimbursement for the moving expenses. 
However, the licensed employee must relocate within the boundaries of the State
of Mississippi.  Any individual receiving relocation assistance through the
Critical Teacher Shortage Act as provided in Section 37-159-5 shall not be
eligible to receive additional relocation funds as authorized in this paragraph;
          (oo)  To use any
available funds, not appropriated or designated for any other purpose, to
reimburse persons who interview for employment as a licensed employee with the
district for the mileage and other actual expenses incurred in the course of travel
to and from the interview at the rate authorized for county and municipal
employees under Section 25-3-41;
          (pp)  Consistent with
the report of the Task Force to Conduct a Best Financial Management Practices
Review, to improve school district management and use of resources and identify
cost savings as established in Section 8 of Chapter 610, Laws of 2002, local
school boards are encouraged to conduct independent reviews of the management and
efficiency of schools and school districts.  Such management and efficiency
reviews shall provide state and local officials and the public with the
following:
              (i)  An assessment
of a school district's governance and organizational structure;
              (ii)  An assessment
of the school district's financial and personnel management; 
              (iii)  An
assessment of revenue levels and sources;
              (iv)  An assessment
of facilities utilization, planning and maintenance;
              (v)  An assessment
of food services, transportation and safety/security systems;
              (vi)  An assessment
of instructional and administrative technology;
              (vii)  A review of
the instructional management and the efficiency and effectiveness of existing
instructional programs; and
              (viii)  Recommended
methods for increasing efficiency and effectiveness in providing educational
services to the public; 
          (qq)  To enter into agreements
with other local school boards for the establishment of an educational service
agency (ESA) to provide for the cooperative needs of the region in which the
school district is located, as provided in Section 37-7-345;  
          (rr)  To implement a
financial literacy program for students in Grades 10 and 11.  The board may review
the national programs and obtain free literature from various nationally
recognized programs.  After review of the different programs, the board may
certify a program that is most appropriate for the school districts' needs.  If
a district implements a financial literacy program, then any student in Grade
10 or 11 may participate in the program.  The financial literacy program shall
include, but is not limited to, instruction in the same areas of personal
business and finance as required under Section 37-1-3(2)(b).  The school board
may coordinate with volunteer teachers from local community organizations, including,
but not limited to, the following:  United States Department of Agriculture
Rural Development, United States Department of Housing and Urban Development,
Junior Achievement, bankers and other nonprofit organizations.  Nothing in this
paragraph shall be construed as to require school boards to implement a
financial literacy program;
          (ss)  To collaborate
with the State Board of Education, Community Action Agencies or the Department
of Human Services to develop and implement a voluntary program to provide
services for a prekindergarten program that addresses the cognitive, social, and
emotional needs of four-year-old and three-year-old children.  The school board
may utilize any source of available revenue to fund the voluntary program.  Effective with the 2013-2014 school year, to
implement voluntary prekindergarten programs under the Early Learning
Collaborative Act of 2013 pursuant to state funds awarded by the State
Department of Education on a matching basis;
          (tt)  With respect to any lawful, written obligation of a school
district, including, but not limited to, leases (excluding leases of sixteenth
section public school trust land), bonds, notes, or other agreement, to agree
in writing with the obligee that the Department of Revenue or any state agency, department or commission created
under state law may:
              (i)  Withhold all or any part (as agreed by the school
board) of any monies which such local school board is entitled to receive from time
to time under any law and which is in the possession of the Department
of Revenue, or any state agency, department or
commission created under state law; and
              (ii)  Pay the same over to any financial institution,
trustee or other obligee, as directed in writing by the school board, to
satisfy all or part of such obligation of the school district.
     The school board may make such written agreement to
withhold and transfer funds irrevocable for the term of the written obligation
and may include in the written agreement any other terms and provisions
acceptable to the school board.  If the school board files a copy of such written
agreement with the Department of Revenue,
or any state agency, department or commission created under state law then the Department
of Revenue or any state agency, department or
commission created under state law shall immediately make the withholdings
provided in such agreement from the amounts due the local school board and
shall continue to pay the same over to such financial institution, trustee or
obligee for the term of the agreement.
     This paragraph (tt) shall not grant any extra
authority to a school board to issue debt in any amount exceeding statutory
limitations on assessed value of taxable property within such school district or
the statutory limitations on debt maturities, and shall not grant any extra
authority to impose, levy or collect a tax which is not otherwise expressly
provided for, and shall not be construed to apply to sixteenth section public
school trust land;
          (uu)  With respect to any matter or transaction that is
competitively bid by a school district, to accept from any bidder as a good-faith
deposit or bid bond or bid surety, the same type of good-faith deposit or bid
bond or bid surety that may be accepted by the state or any other political
subdivision on similar competitively bid matters or transactions.  This
paragraph (uu) shall not be construed to apply to sixteenth section public
school trust land.  The school board may authorize the investment of any school
district funds in the same kind and manner of investments, including pooled
investments, as any other political subdivision, including community hospitals;
          (vv)  To utilize the alternate method for the conveyance or exchange of
unused school buildings and/or land, reserving a partial or other undivided
interest in the property, as specifically authorized and provided in Section 37-7-485;
          (ww) 
To delegate, privatize or otherwise enter into a contract with private entities
for the operation of any and all functions of nonacademic school process, procedures
and operations including, but not limited to, cafeteria workers, janitorial
services, transportation, professional development, achievement and
instructional consulting services materials and products, purchasing
cooperatives, insurance, business manager services, auditing and accounting
services, school safety/risk prevention, data processing and student records,
and other staff services; however, the authority under this paragraph does not
apply to the leasing, management or operation of sixteenth section lands. 
Local school districts, working through their regional education service
agency, are encouraged to enter into buying consortia with other member districts
for the purposes of more efficient use of state resources as described in
Section 37-7-345;
          (xx)  To partner with entities,
organizations and corporations for the purpose of benefiting the school
district;
          (yy) 
To borrow funds from the Rural Economic Development Authority for the maintenance
of school buildings;
          (zz) 
To fund and operate voluntary early childhood education programs, defined as
programs for children less than five (5) years of age on or before September 1,
and to use any source of revenue for such early childhood education programs. 
Such programs shall not conflict with the Early Learning Collaborative Act of
2013;
          (aaa) 
To issue and provide for the use of procurement cards by school board members,
superintendents and licensed school personnel consistent with the rules and
regulations of the Mississippi Department of Finance and Administration under
Section 31-7-9; and
          (bbb)  To conduct an annual comprehensive evaluation of the
superintendent of schools consistent with the assessment components of paragraph
(pp) of this section and the assessment benchmarks established by the
Mississippi School Board Association to evaluate the success the superintendent
has attained in meeting district goals and objectives, the superintendent's leadership skill and whether
or not the superintendent has established appropriate standards for
performance, is monitoring success and is using data for improvement.
     SECTION 12.  Section
37-13-171, Mississippi Code of 1972, is brought forward as follows:
     37-13-171.  (1)  The local school
board of every public school district shall adopt a policy to implement abstinence-only
or abstinence-plus education into its curriculum by June 30, 2012, which instruction
in those subjects shall be implemented not later than the start of the 2012-2013
school year or the local school board shall adopt the program which has been developed
by the Mississippi Department of Human Services and the Mississippi Department of
Health.  The State Department of Education shall approve each district's curriculum
for sex-related education and shall establish a protocol to be used by districts
to provide continuity in teaching the approved curriculum in a manner that is age,
grade and developmentally appropriate.
     (2)  Abstinence-only education
shall remain the state standard for any sex-related education taught in the public
schools.  For purposes of this section, abstinence-only education includes any type
of instruction or program which, at an appropriate age and grade:
          (a)  Teaches the social,
psychological and health gains to be realized by abstaining from sexual activity,
and the likely negative psychological and physical effects of not abstaining;
          (b)  Teaches the harmful
consequences to the child, the child's parents and society that bearing children
out of wedlock is likely to produce, including the health, educational, financial
and other difficulties the child and his or her parents are likely to face, as well
as the inappropriateness of the social and economic burden placed on others;
          (c)  Teaches that unwanted
sexual advances are irresponsible and teaches how to reject sexual advances and
how alcohol and drug use increases vulnerability to sexual advances;
          (d)  Teaches that abstinence
from sexual activity before marriage, and fidelity within marriage, is the only
certain way to avoid out-of-wedlock pregnancy, sexually transmitted diseases and
related health problems.  The instruction or program may include a discussion on
condoms or contraceptives, but only if that discussion includes a factual presentation
of the risks and failure rates of those contraceptives.  In no case shall the instruction
or program include any demonstration of how condoms or other contraceptives are
applied;
          (e)  Teaches the current
state law related to sexual conduct, including forcible rape, statutory rape, paternity
establishment, child support and homosexual activity; and
          (f)  Teaches that a mutually
faithful, monogamous relationship in the context of marriage is the only appropriate
setting for sexual intercourse.
     (3)  A program or instruction
on sex-related education need not include every component listed in subsection (2)
of this section for abstinence-only education.  However, no program or instruction
under an abstinence-only curriculum may include anything that contradicts the excluded
components.  For purposes of this section, abstinence-plus education includes every
component listed under subsection (2) of this section that is age and grade appropriate,
in addition to any other programmatic or instructional component approved by the
department, which shall not include instruction and demonstrations on the application
and use of condoms.  Abstinence-plus education may discuss other contraceptives,
the nature, causes and effects of sexually transmitted diseases, or the prevention
of sexually transmitted diseases, including HIV/AIDS, along with a factual presentation
of the risks and failure rates.
     (4)  Any course containing sex-related
education offered in the public schools shall include instruction in either abstinence-only
or abstinence-plus education.
     (5)  Local school districts,
in their discretion, may host programs designed to teach parents how to discuss
abstinence with their children.
     (6)  There shall be no effort
in either an abstinence-only or an abstinence-plus curriculum to teach that abortion
can be used to prevent the birth of a baby.
     (7)  At all times when sex-related
education is discussed or taught, boys and girls shall be separated according to
gender into different classrooms, sex-related education instruction may not be conducted
when boys and girls are in the company of any students of the opposite gender.
     (8)  This section shall stand
repealed on July 1, 2024.
     SECTION 13.  Section
43-21-105, Mississippi Code of 1972, is brought forward as follows:
     43-21-105.  The following
words and phrases, for purposes of this chapter, shall have the meanings
ascribed herein unless the context clearly otherwise requires:
          (a)  "Youth court"
means the Youth Court Division.
          (b)  "Judge"
means the judge of the Youth Court Division.
          (c)  "Designee"
means any person that the judge appoints to perform a duty which this chapter
requires to be done by the judge or his designee.  The judge may not appoint a
person who is involved in law enforcement or who
is an employee of the Mississippi Department of Human Services or the
Mississippi Department of Child Protection Services to be his designee.
          (d)  "Child"
and "youth" are synonymous, and each means a person who has not
reached his eighteenth birthday.  A child who has not reached his eighteenth
birthday and is on active duty for a branch of the armed services or is married
is not considered a "child" or "youth" for the purposes of
this chapter.
          (e)  "Parent"
means the father or mother to whom the child has been born, or the father or
mother by whom the child has been legally adopted.
          (f)  "Guardian"
means a court-appointed guardian of the person of a child.
          (g)  "Custodian"
means any person having the present care or custody of a child whether such
person be a parent or otherwise.
          (h)  "Legal
custodian" means a court-appointed custodian of the child.
          (i)  "Delinquent
child" means a child who has reached his tenth birthday and who has committed
a delinquent act.
          (j)  "Delinquent
act" is any act, which if committed by an adult, is designated as a crime
under state or federal law, or municipal or county ordinance other than
offenses punishable by life imprisonment or death.  A delinquent act includes
escape from lawful detention and violations of the Uniform Controlled
Substances Law and violent behavior.
          (k)  "Child in
need of supervision" means a child who has reached his seventh birthday
and is in need of treatment or rehabilitation because the child:
              (i)  Is habitually
disobedient of reasonable and lawful commands of his parent, guardian or custodian
and is ungovernable; or
              (ii)  While being
required to attend school, willfully and habitually violates the rules thereof
or willfully and habitually absents himself therefrom; or
              (iii)  Runs away from
home without good cause; or
              (iv)  Has committed
a delinquent act or acts.
          (l)  "Neglected
child" means a child:
              (i)  Whose parent,
guardian or custodian or any person responsible for his care or support,
neglects or refuses, when able so to do, to provide for him proper and
necessary care or support, or education as required by law, or medical,
surgical, or other care necessary for his well-being; however, a parent who
withholds medical treatment from any child who in good faith is under treatment
by spiritual means alone through prayer in accordance with the tenets and
practices of a recognized church or religious denomination by a duly accredited
practitioner thereof shall not, for that reason alone, be considered to be
neglectful under any provision of this chapter; or
              (ii)  Who is otherwise
without proper care, custody, supervision or support; or
              (iii)  Who, for any
reason, lacks the special care made necessary for him by reason of his mental
condition, whether the mental condition is having mental illness or having an
intellectual disability; or
              (iv)  Who, for any
reason, lacks the care necessary for his health, morals or well-being.
          (m)  "Abused child"
means a child whose parent, guardian or custodian or any person responsible for
his care or support, whether legally obligated to do so or not, has caused or
allowed to be caused, upon the child, sexual abuse, sexual exploitation,
commercial sexual exploitation, emotional abuse, mental injury, nonaccidental
physical injury or other maltreatment.  However, physical discipline, including
spanking, performed on a child by a parent, guardian or custodian in a reasonable
manner shall not be deemed abuse under this section.  "Abused child" also means a child who is or has been trafficked
within the meaning of the Mississippi Human Trafficking Act by any person,
without regard to the relationship of the person to the child.
          (n)  "Sexual abuse"
means obscene or pornographic photographing, filming or depiction of children
for commercial purposes, or the rape, molestation, incest, prostitution or
other such forms of sexual exploitation of children under circumstances which
indicate that the child's health or welfare is harmed or threatened.
          (o)  "A child in
need of special care" means a child with any mental or physical illness
that cannot be treated with the dispositional alternatives ordinarily available
to the youth court.
          (p)  A "dependent
child" means any child who is not a child in need of supervision, a
delinquent child, an abused child or a neglected child, and which child has been
voluntarily placed in the custody of the Department of Child Protection
Services by his parent, guardian or custodian.
          (q)  "Custody"
means the physical possession of the child by any person.
          (r)  "Legal custody"
means the legal status created by a court order which gives the legal custodian
the responsibilities of physical possession of the child and the duty to
provide him with food, shelter, education and reasonable medical care, all
subject to residual rights and responsibilities of the parent or guardian of
the person.
          (s)  "Detention"
means the care of children in physically restrictive facilities.
          (t)  "Shelter"
means care of children in physically nonrestrictive facilities.
          (u)  "Records involving
children" means any of the following from which the child can be
identified:
              (i)  All youth
court records as defined in Section 43-21-251;
              (ii)  All forensic
interviews conducted by a child advocacy center in abuse and neglect investigations;
              (iii)  All law
enforcement records as defined in Section 43-21-255;
              (iv)  All agency
records as defined in Section 43-21-257; and
              (v)  All other
documents maintained by any representative of the state, county, municipality
or other public agency insofar as they relate to the apprehension, custody, adjudication
or disposition of a child who is the subject of a youth court cause.
          (v)  "Any person
responsible for care or support" means the person who is providing for the
child at a given time.  This term shall include, but is not limited to, stepparents,
foster parents, relatives, nonlicensed babysitters or other similar persons
responsible for a child and staff of residential care facilities and group
homes that are licensed by the Department of Human Services or the Department
of Child Protection Services.
          (w)  The singular
includes the plural, the plural the singular and the masculine the feminine
when consistent with the intent of this chapter.
          (x)  "Out-of-home"
setting means the temporary supervision or care of children by the staff of licensed
day care centers, the staff of public, private and state schools, the staff of
juvenile detention facilities, the staff of unlicensed residential care
facilities and group homes and the staff of, or individuals representing,
churches, civic or social organizations.
          (y)  "Durable
legal custody" means the legal status created by a court order which gives
the durable legal custodian the responsibilities of physical possession of the
child and the duty to provide him with care, nurture, welfare, food, shelter,
education and reasonable medical care.  All these duties as enumerated are
subject to the residual rights and responsibilities of the natural parent(s) or
guardian(s) of the child or children.
          (z)  "Status
offense" means conduct subject to adjudication by the youth court that
would not be a crime if committed by an adult.
          (aa)  "Financially
able" means a parent or child who is ineligible for a court-appointed
attorney.
          (bb)  "Assessment"
means an individualized examination of a child to determine the child's
psychosocial needs and problems, including the type and extent of any mental
health, substance abuse or co-occurring mental health and substance abuse
disorders and recommendations for treatment.  The term includes, but is not
limited to, a drug and alcohol, psychological or psychiatric evaluation,
records review, clinical interview or the administration of a formal test and
instrument.
          (cc)  "Screening"
means a process, with or without the administration of a formal instrument,
that is designed to identify a child who is at increased risk of having mental
health, substance abuse or co-occurring mental health and substance abuse
disorders that warrant immediate attention, intervention or more comprehensive
assessment.
          (dd)  "Durable legal
relative guardianship" means the legal status created by a youth court
order that conveys the physical and legal custody of a child or children by
durable legal guardianship to a relative or fictive kin who is licensed as a
foster or resource parent.
          (ee)  "Relative"
means a person related to the child by affinity or consanguinity within the
third degree.
          (ff)  "Fictive kin"
means a person not related to the child legally or biologically but who is considered
a relative due to a significant, familial-like and ongoing relationship with
the child and family.
          (gg)  "Reasonable
efforts" means the exercise of reasonable care and due diligence by the
Department of Human Services, the Department of Child Protection Services, or
any other appropriate entity or person to use appropriate and available
services to prevent the unnecessary removal of the child from the home or
provide other services related to meeting the needs of the child and the
parents.
          (hh)  "Commercial
sexual exploitation" means any sexual act or crime of a sexual nature,
which is committed against a child for financial or economic gain, to obtain a
thing of value for quid pro quo exchange of property or for any other purpose.
     SECTION 14.  This act
shall take effect and be in force from and after July 1, 2023.







MISSISSIPPI LEGISLATURE
2023 Regular Session
To: Appropriations
By: Representative Criswell
House Bill 1099
AN ACT TO REQUIRE A FIDUCIARY OR THE GOVERNING BOARD OF A
PUBLIC RETIREMENT SYSTEM, IN MAKING AND SUPERVISING INVESTMENTS FOR THE PUBLIC
RETIREMENT SYSTEM, TO DISCHARGE ITS DUTIES SOLELY IN THE FINANCIAL INTEREST OF
THE PARTICIPANTS AND BENEFICIARIES FOR THE EXCLUSIVE PURPOSES OF PROVIDING
FINANCIAL BENEFITS TO PARTICIPANTS AND THEIR BENEFICIARIES AND DEFRAYING
REASONABLE EXPENSES OF ADMINISTERING THE SYSTEM; TO PROVIDE THAT AN INVESTMENT
MANAGER RETAINED BY THE GOVERNING BOARD SHALL BE SUBJECT TO THE SAME FIDUCIARY
DUTIES AS THE BOARD; TO REQUIRE A FIDUCIARY TO TAKE INTO ACCOUNT ONLY FINANCIAL
FACTORS WHEN DISCHARGING ITS DUTIES WITH RESPECT TO A RETIREMENT PLAN; TO
PROVIDE THAT FINANCIAL FACTORS DO NOT INCLUDE ANY ACTION TAKEN, OR FACTOR
CONSIDERED, BY A FIDUCIARY WITH ANY PURPOSE TO FURTHER SOCIAL, POLITICAL OR
IDEOLOGICAL INTERESTS; TO PROVIDE THAT ALL SHARES HELD DIRECTLY OR INDIRECTLY
BY OR ON BEHALF OF A PUBLIC RETIREMENT SYSTEM AND/OR THE PARTICIPANTS AND THEIR
BENEFICIARIES SHALL BE VOTED SOLELY IN THE FINANCIAL INTEREST OF PLAN
PARTICIPANTS AND THEIR BENEFICIARIES; TO PROVIDE THAT THIS ACT, OR ANY CONTRACT
SUBJECT TO THIS ACT, MAY BE ENFORCED BY THE ATTORNEY GENERAL; TO PROVIDE THAT A
PERSON OR COMPANY WHO SERVES AS A FIDUCIARY AND WHO VIOLATES THE FIDUCIARY DUTY
IMPOSED BY THIS ACT SHALL BE OBLIGATED TO PAY DAMAGES TO THE PUBLIC RETIREMENT
SYSTEM IN AN AMOUNT EQUAL TO THREE TIMES ALL MONIES PAID TO THE PERSON OR
COMPANY BY THE SYSTEM FOR THE SERVICES OF THE PERSON OR COMPANY; TO AMEND
SECTIONS 25-11-121 AND 25-11-407, MISSISSIPPI CODE OF 1972, TO CONFORM TO THE
PRECEDING PROVISIONS; AND FOR RELATED PURPOSES.
     BE IT ENACTED BY THE
LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF MISSISSIPPI:
     SECTION 1.  Definitions.
 As used in this act, the following terms shall be defined as provided in this
subsection:
          (a)  "Board" means
the board of trustees or other governing board of the public retirement system.
          (b)  "Fiduciary"
includes any person acting on behalf of the board of trustees as an investment
manager or proxy advisor.
          (c)  "Fiduciary commitment"
means any evidence of a fiduciary's purpose in managing assets as a fiduciary,
including, but not limited to, any of the following in a fiduciary's capacity
as a fiduciary:
               (i)  Advertising,
statements, explanations, reports, letters to clients, communications with
portfolio companies, statements of principles, or commitments; or
               (ii)  Participation
in, affiliation with, or status as a signatory to, any coalition, initiative,
joint statement of principles, or agreement.
          (c)  "Financial"
means having been prudently determined by a fiduciary to have a material effect
on the financial risk or the financial return of an investment.
               (i)  The term "financial"
does not include any action taken, or factor considered, by a fiduciary with
any purpose whatsoever to further social, political or ideological interests.
               (ii)  A fiduciary
may reasonably be determined to have taken an action, or considered a factor,
with a purpose to further social, political, or ideological interests based
upon evidence indicating such a purpose, including, but not limited to, any fiduciary
commitment to further, through portfolio company engagement, board or
shareholder votes, or otherwise as a fiduciary, any of the following beyond what
controlling federal or state law requires:
                    1.  Eliminating,
reducing, offsetting, or disclosing greenhouse gas emissions;
                    2.  Divesting
from, limiting investment in, or limiting the activities or investments of, any
company, for failing, or not committing, to meet environmental standards or
disclosures;
                    3.  Access to
abortion, sex or gender change or transgender surgery; or
                    4.  Divesting
from, limiting investment in, or limiting the activities or investments of, any
company that engages in, facilitates, or supports the manufacture, import,
distribution, marketing or advertising, sale, or lawful use of firearms, ammunition
or components parts and accessories of firearms or ammunition.
          (d)  "Governmental
entity" means:
               (i)  The State of Mississippi
or any political subdivision of the state; or
               (ii)  Any school,
college, university, administration, authority, or other enterprise operated by
the state or any political subdivision of the state.
          (e)  "Public retirement
system," "system" or "plan" means any retirement or
pension system or plan maintained, provided or offered by a governmental entity.
     SECTION 2.  Fiduciary
duty.  (1)  In making and supervising investments of the reserve fund of a
public retirement system, a fiduciary or the board shall discharge its duties
solely in the financial interest of the participants and beneficiaries for the
exclusive purposes of:
          (a)  Providing
financial benefits to participants and their beneficiaries; and
          (b)  Defraying
reasonable expenses of administering the system.
     (2)  An investment manager retained
by the board shall be subject to the same fiduciary duties as the board.
     (3)  A fiduciary shall take
into account only financial factors when discharging its duties with respect to
a plan. 
     (4)  All shares held directly
or indirectly by or on behalf of a public retirement system and/or the
participants and their beneficiaries shall be voted solely in the financial
interest of plan participants and their beneficiaries.
     (5)  Unless no economically
practicable alternative is available, the governmental entity that establishes
or maintains a public retirement system or the board of the system may not
grant proxy voting authority to any person who is not a part of the governmental
entity, unless that person has a practice of, and in writing commits to, follow
guidelines that match the governmental entity's and the board's obligation to
act solely upon financial factors.
     (5)  Unless no economically
practicable alternative is available, public retirement system assets shall not
be entrusted to a fiduciary, unless that fiduciary has a practice of, and in
writing commits to, follow guidelines, when engaging with portfolio companies
and voting shares or proxies, that match the governmental entity's and the board's
obligation to act solely upon financial factors.
     (6)  Unless no economically
practicable alternative is available, a fiduciary or the board may not adopt a
practice of following the recommendations of a proxy advisor or other service
provider, unless such advisor or service provider has a practice of, and in
writing commits to, follow proxy voting guidelines that match the governmental
entity's and the board's obligation to act solely upon financial factors.
     (7)  All proxy votes shall
be tabulated and reported annually to the board.  For each vote, the report
shall contain a vote caption, the plan's vote, the recommendation of company
management, and, if applicable, the proxy advisor's recommendation. These
reports shall be posted on a publicly available webpage on the board's website.

     SECTION 3.  Enforcement.
 (1)  This act, or any contract subject to this act, may be enforced by the Attorney
General. 
     (2)  If the Attorney General
has reasonable cause to believe that a person has engaged in, is engaging in,
or is about to engage in, a violation of this act, he or she may:
          (a)  Require such
person to file on such forms as he or she prescribes a statement or report in
writing, under oath, as to all the facts and circumstances concerning the violation;
and
          (b)  Such other data
and information as he or she may deem necessary.
     (3)  In addition to any
other remedies available at law or equity, a person or company who serves as a
fiduciary and who violates Section 2 of this act shall be obligated to pay
damages to the public retirement system in an amount equal to three (3) times
all monies paid to the person or company by the system for the services of the person
or company.
     SECTION 4.  Section
25-11-121, Mississippi Code of 1972, is amended as follows:
     25-11-121.  (1)  The board shall,
from time to time, determine the current requirements for benefit payments and administrative
expense which shall be maintained as a cash working balance, except that such cash
working balance shall not exceed at any time an amount necessary to meet the current
obligations of the system for a period of ninety (90) days.  Any amounts in excess
of such cash working balance shall be invested, as follows:
          (a)  Funds may be deposited
in any institution insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation that maintains
a facility that takes deposits in the State of Mississippi or a custodial bank;
          (b)  Corporate bonds and
taxable municipal bonds; or corporate short-term obligations of corporations or
of wholly owned subsidiaries of corporations, whose short-term obligations are rated
A-2 or better by Standard and Poor's, rated P-2 or better by Moody's Investment
Service, F-2 or better by Fitch Ratings, Ltd., or the equivalent of these ratings
if assigned by another United States Securities and Exchange Commission designated
Nationally Recognized Statistical Rating Organization;
          (c)  Agency and nonagency
residential and commercial mortgage-backed securities and collateralized mortgage
obligations;
          (d)  Asset-backed securities;
          (e)  Bank loans;
          (f)  Convertible bonds;
          (g)  Bonds of the Tennessee
Valley Authority;
          (h)  Bonds, notes, certificates
and other valid obligations of the United States, and other valid obligations of
any federal instrumentality that issues securities under authority of an act of
Congress and are exempt from registration with the Securities and Exchange Commission;
          (i)  Bonds, notes, debentures
and other securities issued by any federal instrumentality and fully guaranteed
by the United States;
          (j)  Interest-bearing revenue
bonds or notes or bonds or notes which are general obligations of any state in the
United States or of any city or county therein;
          (k)  Bonds of established
non-United States companies and foreign government securities.  The board may take
requisite action to effectuate or hedge transactions or invest in currency through
foreign or domestic banks, including the purchase and sale, transfer, exchange,
or otherwise disposal of, and generally deal in foreign exchange through the use
of foreign currency, interbank forward contracts, futures contracts, options contracts,
swaps and other related derivative instruments, notwithstanding any other provisions
of this article to the contrary;
          (l)  Shares of stocks, common
and/or preferred, of corporations created by or existing under the laws of the United
States or any state, district or territory thereof and shares of stocks, common
and/or preferred, and convertible securities of non-United States companies; provided:
               (i)  The maximum investments
in stocks shall not exceed eighty percent (80%) of the total book value of the total
investment fund of the system;
              (ii)  The stock of such
corporation shall:
                   1.  Be listed on
a national stock exchange; or
                   2.  Be traded in
the over-the-counter market;
              (iii)  The outstanding
shares of such corporation shall have a total market value of not less than Fifty
Million Dollars ($50,000,000.00);
              (iv)  The amount of
investment in any one (1) corporation shall not exceed three percent (3%) of the
book value of the assets of the system;
              (v)  The shares of any
one (1) corporation owned by the system shall not exceed five percent (5%) of that
corporation's outstanding stock.
     The board may take requisite
action utilizing foreign currency as an investment vehicle, or to effectuate or
hedge transactions for shares of stocks and convertible securities of non-United
States companies through foreign or domestic banks, including the purchase and sale,
transfer, exchange, or otherwise disposal of, and generally deal in foreign exchange
through the use of foreign currency, interbank forward contracts, futures contracts,
options contracts, swaps and other related derivative instruments, notwithstanding
any other provisions of this article to the contrary;
          (m)  Covered call and put
options on securities or indices traded on one or more of the regulated exchanges;
          (n)  Pooled or commingled
funds managed by a corporate trustee or by a Securities and Exchange Commission
registered investment advisory firm retained as an investment manager by the board
of trustees, and shares of investment companies and unit investment trusts registered
under the Investment Company Act of 1940, where such pooled or commingled funds
or shares are comprised of common or preferred stocks, bonds, money market instruments
or other investments authorized under this section.  Such investment in commingled
funds or shares shall be held in trust; provided that the total book value of investments
under this paragraph shall at no time exceed five percent (5%) of the total book
value of all investments of the system.  Any investment manager approved by the
board of trustees shall invest such commingled funds or shares as a fiduciary in
accordance with Sections 1 though 3 of this act;
          (o)  Pooled or commingled
real estate funds or real estate securities managed by a corporate trustee or by
a Securities and Exchange Commission registered investment advisory firm retained
as an investment manager by the board of trustees. Such investment in commingled
funds or shares shall be held in trust; provided that the total book value of investments
under this paragraph shall at no time exceed ten percent (10%) of the total book
value of all investments of the system.  Any investment manager approved by the
board of trustees shall invest such commingled funds or shares as a fiduciary in
accordance with Sections 1 though 3 of this act.  The ten percent (10%) limitation
in this paragraph shall not be subject to the five percent (5%) limitation in paragraph
(n) of this subsection;
          (p)  Types of investments
not specifically authorized by this subsection if the investments are in the form
of a separate account managed by a Securities and Exchange Commission registered
investment advisory firm retained as an investment manager by the board; or a limited
partnership or commingled fund approved by the board; provided that the total book
value of investments under this paragraph shall at no time exceed twenty percent
(20%) of the total book value of all investments of the system.  Any person or entity
who exercises any discretionary authority or discretionary control respecting management
of the separate account, limited partnership or commingled fund, or who exercises
any authority or control respecting management or disposition of the assets of the
separate account, limited partnership or commingled fund, shall exercise such authority
or control as a fiduciary in accordance with Sections 1 though 3 of this act.
     (2)  All investments shall be
acquired at prices not exceeding the prevailing market values for such investments.
     (3)  Any limitations herein set
forth shall be applicable only at the time of purchase and shall not require the
liquidation of any investment at any time.  All investments shall be clearly marked
to indicate ownership by the system and to the extent possible shall be registered
in the name of the system.
     (4)  Subject to the above terms,
conditions, limitations and restrictions, the board shall have power to sell, assign,
transfer and dispose of any of the securities and investments of the system, provided
that said sale, assignment or transfer has the majority approval of the entire board. 
The board may employ or contract with investment managers, evaluation services or
other such services as determined by the board to be necessary for the effective
and efficient operation of the system.
     (5)  Except as otherwise provided
herein, no trustee and no employee of the board shall have any direct or indirect
interest in the income, gains or profits of any investment made by the board, nor
shall any such person receive any pay or emolument for his services in connection
with any investment made by the board.  No trustee or employee of the board shall
become an endorser or surety, or in any manner an obligor for money loaned by or
borrowed from the system.
     (6)  All interest derived from
investments and any gains from the sale or exchange of investments shall be credited
by the board to the account of the system.
     (7)  The board of trustees shall
credit regular interest to the annuity savings account monthly.  Regular interest
shall mean such per centum rate to be compounded annually as set by the board of
trustees through regulation.
     (8)  The board of trustees shall
be the custodian of the funds of the system.  All retirement allowance payrolls
shall be certified by the executive director who shall furnish the board a surety
bond in a company authorized to do business in Mississippi in such an amount as
shall be required by the board, the premium to be paid by the board from the expense
account.
     (9)  For the purpose of meeting
disbursements for retirement allowances, annuities and other payments, cash may
be kept available, not exceeding the requirements of the system for a period of
ninety (90) days, on deposit in one or more banks or trust companies organized under
the laws of the State of Mississippi or the laws of the United States, provided
that the sum on deposit in any one (1) bank or trust company shall not exceed thirty-five
percent (35%) of the paid-up capital and regular surplus of such bank or trust company.
     (10)  The board, the executive
director and employees shall discharge their duties with respect to the investments
of the system solely for the interest of the system with the care, skill, prudence
and diligence under the circumstances then prevailing that a prudent investor acting
in a like capacity and familiar with such matters would use in the conduct of an
enterprise of a like character and with like aims, including diversifying the investments
of the system so as to minimize the risk of large losses, unless under the circumstances
it is clearly prudent not to do so.  The board, the executive director and employees
shall discharge their duties under this subsection in accordance with Sections 1
though 3 of this act.
     (11)  Documentary material or
data made or received by the system which consists of trade secrets or commercial
or financial information that relates to the investments of the system shall be
exempt from the Mississippi Public Records Act of 1983 if the disclosure of the
material or data is likely to impair the system's ability to obtain such information
in the future, or is likely to cause substantial harm to the competitive position
of the person or entity from whom the information was obtained.
     SECTION 5.  Section
25-11-407, Mississippi Code of 1972, is amended as follows:
     25-11-407.  The Board of
Trustees of the Public Employees' Retirement System shall designate not less than
three (3) nor more than five (5) companies to provide annuity contracts, mutual
fund accounts or similar investment products, and the types of investment
contracts or funds that may be offered by those companies.  In making those
designations, the board of trustees shall consider and be guided by:
          (a)  The nature and
extent of the rights and benefits to be provided by those contracts or
accounts, or both, for participants and their beneficiaries;
          (b)  The relation of
those rights and benefits to the amount of contributions to be made;
          (c)  The suitability of
those rights and benefits to the needs of the participants;
          (d)  The efficacy of
the contracts or accounts, or both, in the recruitment and retention of faculty
and administrators; 
          (e)  The ability and
experience of the designated  companies in providing those suitable rights and
benefits under  those contracts or accounts, or both; and
          (f)  The ability and
experience of the designated companies to provide both suitable participant
investment guidance and investment options.
     The companies shall act in a
fiduciary capacity in accordance with Sections 1 through 3 of this act
in selecting investment products that are suitable for the optional retirement
program.  It shall be the duty of the companies to report to and seek approval
from the board for the investment products made available under this paragraph
and to report the participant use of those options annually.  The board
reserves the right to refuse or discontinue any product offered by those
companies.
     SECTION 6.  This act
shall take effect and be in force from and after July 1, 2023.






ASSEMBLY, No. 3883 

STATE OF NEW JERSEY
220th LEGISLATURE
  
INTRODUCED MAY 9, 2022
 




 
Sponsored by:
Assemblyman  SEAN T. KEAN
District 30 (Monmouth and Ocean)
Assemblyman  CHRISTOPHER P. DEPHILLIPS
District 40 (Bergen, Essex, Morris and Passaic)
 
 
 
 
SYNOPSIS
     Prohibits board of education from providing
instruction in family life education, sex education, sexual health, sexual
orientation, or gender identity to students in preschool through grade four. 
 
CURRENT VERSION OF TEXT 
     As introduced.
   




An Act concerning sex education in public schools and
supplementing chapter 35 of Title 18A of the New Jersey Statutes.  
 
     Be It
Enacted by the Senate and General Assembly of
the State of New Jersey:
 
     1.    a.  A board of education
shall not provide instruction in family life education, sex education, sexual
health, sexual orientation, or gender identity to students enrolled in
preschool through grade four.  
     b.    Notwithstanding the
provisions of section 4 of P.L.2007, c.260 (C.18A:7F-46) or any other law,
rule, or regulation to the contrary, the State Board of Education shall, within
30 days of the effective date of this act, revise the New Jersey Student
Learning Standards in Comprehensive Health and Physical Education to reflect
the provisions of subsection a. of this section.  
 
     2.    This act shall take
effect immediately.  
 
 
STATEMENT
 
     This bill prohibits a board of
education from providing instruction in family life education, sex education,
sexual health, sexual orientation, or gender identity to students enrolled in
preschool through grade four.  
     The bill also requires that
the State Board of Education, within 30 days of the bill's effective date,
revise the New Jersey Student Learning Standards in Comprehensive Health and
Physical Education to reflect the bill's provisions.  




Senate
File
348
-
Introduced


SENATE
FILE
348


BY
SALMON


A
BILL
FOR


An
Act
relating
to
minors
present
at
drag
shows,
and
providing
1


penalties.
2


BE
IT
ENACTED
BY
THE
GENERAL
ASSEMBLY
OF
THE
STATE
OF
IOWA:
3


TLSB
2039XS
(7)
90


as/rh




S.F.
348


Section
1.
NEW
SECTION
.
728.5A
Minors
present
at
drag
1


shows.
2


1.
For
purposes
of
this
section,
“drag
show”
means
a
3


performance
in
which
all
of
the
following
apply:
4


a.
The
main
aspect
of
the
performance
is
a
performer
5


who
exhibits
a
gender
identity
that
is
different
than
the
6


performer’s
gender
assigned
at
birth
through
the
use
of
7


clothing,
makeup,
accessories,
or
other
gender
signifiers.
8


b.
The
performer
sings,
lip-syncs,
dances,
reads,
or
9


otherwise
performs
before
an
audience
for
entertainment,
10


whether
or
not
performed
for
payment.
11


2.
No
minor
shall
be
present
at
or
view
a
drag
show
at
a
12


place
of
business.
13


3.
A
person
over
eighteen
years
of
age
who
knowingly
brings
14


a
minor
to
a
drag
show
at
a
place
of
business
shall
be
guilty
15


of
a
simple
misdemeanor.
16


4.
A
place
of
business
that
allows
a
minor
to
be
present
at
17


or
view
a
drag
show
hosted
by
the
place
of
business
shall
be
18


fined
ten
thousand
dollars
per
minor
for
each
violation
of
this
19


section.
20


5.
An
owner,
manager,
or
person
who
exercises
direct
control
21


over
a
place
of
business
who
knowingly
allows
a
minor
to
be
22


present
at
or
view
a
drag
show
hosted
by
the
place
of
business
23


shall
be
guilty
of
a
serious
misdemeanor.
24


6.
No
state
agency
or
public
entity
that
receives
state
25


funds
shall
use
such
funds
to
host
a
drag
show.
A
state
agency
26


or
public
entity
committing
a
violation
of
this
section
shall
27


be
fined
ten
thousand
dollars
per
minor
for
each
violation.
28


7.
A
parent
or
legal
guardian
of
a
minor
may
institute
a
29


civil
action
for
damages
in
the
amount
of
not
less
than
ten
30


thousand
dollars
and
up
to
fifty
thousand
dollars
for
each
31


violation
of
this
section.
A
court
shall
award
the
prevailing
32


party
court
costs
and
reasonable
attorney
fees.
33


EXPLANATION
34


The
inclusion
of
this
explanation
does
not
constitute
agreement
with
35


-1-


LSB
2039XS
(7)
90


as/rh
1/
2





S.F.
348


the
explanation’s
substance
by
the
members
of
the
general
assembly.
1


This
bill
relates
to
minors
present
at
drag
shows.
2


The
bill
provides
that
no
minor
shall
be
present
at
or
view
3


a
drag
show,
defined
in
the
bill,
at
a
place
of
business.
A
4


person
over
18
years
of
age
who
knowingly
brings
a
minor
to
a
5


drag
show
at
a
place
of
business
shall
be
guilty
of
a
simple
6


misdemeanor,
punishable
by
confinement
for
no
more
than
30
7


days
and
a
fine
of
at
least
$105
but
not
more
than
$855.
A
8


place
of
business
that
allows
a
minor
to
be
present
at
or
view
9


a
drag
show
hosted
by
the
place
of
business
shall
be
fined
10


$10,000
per
minor
for
each
violation
of
the
bill.
An
owner,
11


manager,
or
person
who
exercises
direct
control
over
a
place
of
12


business
who
knowingly
allows
a
minor
to
be
present
at
or
view
13


a
drag
show
hosted
by
the
place
of
business
shall
be
guilty
of
a
14


serious
misdemeanor,
punishable
by
confinement
for
no
more
than
15


one
year
and
a
fine
of
at
least
$430
but
not
more
than
$2,560.
16


The
bill
provides
that
no
state
agency
or
public
entity
that
17


receives
state
funds
shall
use
such
funds
to
host
a
drag
show.
18


A
state
agency
or
public
entity
committing
a
violation
shall
be
19


fined
$10,000
per
minor
for
each
violation.
20


The
bill
provides
that
a
parent
or
legal
guardian
of
a
minor
21


may
institute
a
civil
action
for
damages
in
the
amount
of
not
22


less
than
$10,000
and
up
to
$50,000
for
each
violation
of
the
23


bill,
and
shall
be
awarded
court
costs
and
reasonable
attorney
24


fees
if
the
parent
or
legal
guardian
is
the
prevailing
party.
25


For
purposes
of
Code
chapter
728
(obscenity),
“place
of
26


business”
is
defined
as
the
premises
of
a
business
required
to
27


obtain
a
sales
or
use
tax
permit
pursuant
to
Code
chapter
423,
28


the
premises
of
a
nonprofit
or
not-for-profit
organization,
and
29


the
premises
of
an
establishment
which
is
open
to
the
public
30


at
large
or
where
entrance
is
limited
by
a
cover
charge
or
31


membership
requirement;
and
“minor”
is
defined
as
any
person
32


under
the
age
of
18.
33


-2-


LSB
2039XS
(7)
90


as/rh
2/
2





MISSISSIPPI LEGISLATURE
2023 Regular Session
To: Judiciary A
By: Representative Ford (73rd)
House Bill 509
AN ACT TO ESTABLISH THE "FAMILIES' RIGHTS AND
RESPONSIBILITIES ACT OF 2023"; TO DEFINE TERMINOLOGY USED HEREIN; TO
ESTABLISH THAT A PARENT'S LIBERTY TO DIRECT THE UPBRINGING, EDUCATION, HEALTH
CARE AND MENTAL HEALTH OF HIS OR HER CHILD IS A FUNDAMENTAL RIGHT; TO PROHIBIT
THE STATE OR ANY POLITICAL SUBDIVISION THEREOF FROM SUBSTANTIALLY BURDENING A
PARENT'S FUNDAMENTAL RIGHT WITHOUT DEMONSTRATING THAT THE BURDEN IS REQUIRED BY
A COMPELLING GOVERNMENTAL INTEREST; TO PROVIDE THAT ALL PARENTAL RIGHTS ARE
EXCLUSIVELY RESERVED TO A PARENT OF A CHILD WITHOUT OBSTRUCTION BY OR
INTERFERENCE FROM THE STATE OR ANY POLITICAL SUBDIVISION THEREOF; TO PROVIDE
THAT ABUSE OR NEGLECT OF A CHILD BY A PARENT OR THE ACTION OR DECISION OF A
PARENT THAT WOULD END LIFE ARE NOT AUTHORIZED BY THIS ACT; TO PROHIBIT
EMPLOYEES OF THIS STATE AND ANY POLITICAL SUBDIVISION THEREOF, EXCEPT FOR LAW
ENFORCEMENT PERSONNEL, FROM ENCOURAGING OR COERCING A CHILD TO WITHHOLD
INFORMATION FROM THE CHILD'S PARENT; TO FURTHER PROHIBIT SUCH EMPLOYEES FROM WITHHOLDING
INFORMATION THAT IS RELEVANT TO A CHILD'S PHYSICAL, EMOTIONAL OR MENTAL HEALTH
FROM A CHILD'S PARENT; TO REQUIRE THE BOARD OF EDUCATION OF A SCHOOL DISTRICT
TO DEVELOP AND ADOPT A POLICY TO PROMOTE THE INVOLVEMENT OF PARENTS OF CHILDREN
ENROLLED IN THE DISTRICT'S SCHOOLS; TO PRESCRIBE THE MINIMUM REQUIREMENT
PROCEDURES TO BE ADDRESSED BY THE POLICY; TO PROVIDE THE BOARD OF EDUCATION OF
A SCHOOL DISTRICT WITH THE DISCRETION TO ADOPT A POLICY TO PROVIDE TO PARENTS
THE INFORMATION IN AN ELECTRONIC FORM; TO REQUIRE PARENTS TO SUBMIT A WRITTEN
OR ELECTRONIC REQUEST FOR THE CHILD'S INFORMATION TO THE SCHOOL PRINCIPAL OR
THE SUPERINTENDENT OF THE SCHOOL DISTRICT; TO REQUIRE THE SCHOOL PRINCIPAL OR
SUPERINTENDENT TO PROVIDE THE REQUESTED INFORMATION TO THE PARENTS WITHIN TEN
DAYS OF RECEIVING THE REQUEST, OR SUBMIT TO THE PARENT A WRITTEN EXPLANATION OF
THE REASONS FOR THE DENIAL OF THE REQUESTED INFORMATION; TO PRESCRIBE THE
PROCESS BY WHICH A PARENT MAY SUBMIT A FORMAL CONSIDERATION OF THE REQUEST OF INFORMATION
WITH THE SCHOOL BOARD IF THE REQUESTED INFORMATION IS NOT RECEIVED 15 DAYS
AFTER SUBMITTING THE INITIAL REQUEST; TO STIPULATE THE LIMITATIONS PLACED UPON
PERSONS, CORPORATIONS, ASSOCIATIONS, ORGANIZATIONS, STATE SUPPORTED
INSTITUTIONS OR INDIVIDUALS EMPLOYED BY ANY OF THESE ENTITIES TO PROVIDE ANY
MEDICAL OR MENTAL HEALTH SERVICE OR PROCEDURE ON A CHILD WITHOUT FIRST
OBTAINING THE CONSENT OF THE CHILD'S PARENT, EXCEPT AS OTHERWISE PROVIDED BY
LAW OR COURT ORDER; TO PRESCRIBE EXCEPTIONS TO THE LIMITATION WHEN PARENTAL
CONSENT IS NOT CAPABLE OF BEING GIVEN OR IN EMERGENCY SITUATIONS WHEN IMMINENT
BODILY HARM OR DEATH COULD RESULT; TO SPECIFY THE MANNER BY WHICH PARENTAL
CONSENT MUST BE VERIFIED IF TELEMEDICINE IS PROVIDED; TO ESTABLISH A CAUSE OF ACTION
FOR VIOLATION OF THIS ACT; TO PROVIDE THAT THIS ACT SHALL SERVE AS A DEFENSE TO
ANY CAUSE OF ACTION THAT IS RAISED AS A RESULT OF A VIOLATION THEREOF; TO PROVIDE
THAT THE RULES OF CONSTRUCTION SHALL PROVIDE BROAD PROTECTION OF A PARENT'S FUNDAMENTAL
RIGHTS AS INALIENABLE UNLESS THOSE RIGHTS HAVE BEEN LEGALLY WAIVED OR LEGALLY TERMINATED;
TO AMEND SECTION 37-3-49, MISSISSIPPI CODE OF 1972, TO PROVIDE THE PARENT OF
EACH PUBLIC SCHOOL STUDENT WITH THE RIGHT TO RECEIVE EFFECTIVE COMMUNICATION
FROM THE SCHOOL PRINCIPAL AS TO THE MANNER IN WHICH INSTRUCTIONAL MATERIALS ARE
USED TO IMPLEMENT THE SCHOOL'S CURRICULAR OBJECTIVES; TO AMEND SECTION 37-13-173,
MISSISSIPPI CODE OF 1972, TO PROVIDE PARENTS THE AUTHORITY TO OPT THEIR
CHILDREN OUT OF ANY INSTRUCTION OF THE SCHOOL DISTRICT'S COMPREHENSIVE HEALTH
EDUCATION RELATING TO SEX EDUCATION UPON SUBMITTING A WRITTEN REQUEST TO THE
SCHOOL PRINCIPAL; TO AMEND SECTION 37-15-3, MISSISSIPPI CODE OF 1972, TO
PROVIDE THAT STUDENT AND PARENTAL RIGHTS TO EDUCATION RECORDS CREATED, MAINTAINED,
OR USED BY PUBLIC EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS AND AGENCIES SHALL BE PROTECTED; TO STIPULATE
THAT STUDENTS AND THEIR PARENTS MAINTAIN THE RIGHT TO ACCESS THE STUDENT'S EDUCATIONAL
RECORDS, WAIVE ACCESS TO SUCH RECORDS, CHALLENGE THE CONTENT OF SUCH RECORDS, PRIVACY
OF SUCH RECORDS AND TO RECEIVE ANNUAL NOTICE OF THE RIGHTS TO SUCH RECORDS; TO
BRING FORWARD SECTIONS 37-7-301, 37-13-171 AND 43-21-105, MISSISSIPPI CODE OF
1972, FOR PURPOSES OF POSSIBLE AMENDMENTS; AND FOR RELATED PURPOSES.
     BE IT ENACTED BY THE
LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF MISSISSIPPI:
     SECTION 1.  This
act shall be known and may be cited as the "Families' Rights and Responsibilities
Act of 2023."
     SECTION 2.  As
used in this act, the following terms shall have the meaning ascribed in this section
unless context of usage requires otherwise:
          (a)  "Child"
means an individual under the age of eighteen (18).  The term does not include any
child who has been adjudicated as a legally emancipated minor in accordance with
state law by a court of competent jurisdiction.
          (b)  "Curriculum"
includes all textbooks, reading materials, handouts, videos, presentations,
digital materials, websites, online applications, digital applications for a
phone, laptop or tablet, questionnaires, surveys, or other written or
electronic materials that have been or will be assigned, distributed or
otherwise presented physically or virtually to students in a class or course.
          (c)  "Educational
records" includes attendance records, test scores of school-administered
tests and state-wide assessments, grades, extracurricular activity or club
participation, e-mail accounts, online or virtual accounts or data,
disciplinary records, counseling records, psychological records, applications
for admission, health and immunization information including any medical
records maintained by a health clinic or medical facility operated or
controlled by the school district or located on district property, teacher and
counselor evaluations, and reports of behavioral patterns.
          (d)  "Parent"
means a biological parent of a child, an adoptive parent of a child, or an
individual who has been granted exclusive right, guardianship and authority
over the welfare of a child under state law.
          (e)  "Substantial
burden" means any action that directly or indirectly constrains, inhibits,
curtails, or denies the right of a parent to direct the upbringing, education,
health care and mental health of that parent's child, or compels any action
contrary to the right of a parent to direct the upbringing, education, health
care and mental health of that parent's child. The term includes, but is not
limited to, withholding benefits, assessing criminal, civil or administrative
penalties or damages, or exclusion from governmental assistance programs.
     SECTION 3.  Parental
Rights are Fundamental.
     (1)  The liberty of a parent to direct the upbringing, education,
health care and mental health of that parent's child is a fundamental right.
     (2)  This state, any
political subdivision of this state or any other governmental entity shall not
substantially burden the fundamental right of a parent to direct the
upbringing, education, health care and mental health of that parent's child
without demonstrating that the burden is required by a compelling governmental interest
of the highest order as applied to the parent and the child and is the least
restrictive means of furthering that compelling governmental interest.
     SECTION 4.  Rights
and Responsibilities.
     (1)  All parental rights are
exclusively reserved to a parent of a child without obstruction by or
interference from this state, any political subdivision of this state, any
other governmental entity or any other institution, including without limitation,
the following rights and responsibilities:
          (a)  To direct the
education of the child, including the right to choose public, private,
religious or home schools, and the right to make reasonable choices within
public schools for the education of the child;
          (b)  To access and
review all written and electronic educational records relating to the child
that are controlled by or in the possession of a school;
          (c)  To direct the
upbringing of the child;
          (d)  To direct the moral
or religious training of the child;
          (e)  To make and
consent in writing to all physical and mental health care decisions for the
child;
          (f)  To access and
review all health and medical records of the child;
          (g)  To consent in
writing before a biometric scan of the child is made, shared or stored;
          (h)  To consent in writing
before any record of the child's blood or deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) is created,
stored or shared, unless authorized pursuant to a court order;
          (i)  To consent in
writing before any governmental entity makes a video or voice recording of the
child, unless the video or voice recording is made during or as a part of:
               (i)  A court
proceeding;
               (ii)  A law
enforcement investigation;
               (iii)  A forensic
interview in a criminal or Department of Child Protection Services
investigation;
               (iv)  The security
or surveillance of buildings or grounds; or
               (v)  A photo
identification card;
          (j)  To be notified
promptly if an employee of this state, any political subdivision of this state,
any other governmental entity or any other institution suspects that abuse, neglect
or any criminal offense has been committed against the child;
          (k)  To opt the child
out of any personal analysis, evaluation, survey or data collection by a school
district that would capture data for inclusion in the state longitudinal student
data system except what is necessary and essential to establish a student's
educational record;
          (l)  The right to have
the child excused from school attendance for religious purposes; and
          (m)  The right to
participate in parent-teacher associations and school organizations that are
sanctioned by the board of education of a school district.
     (2)  This section does not
authorize or allow a parent to abuse or neglect a child as defined in Section 43-21-105.
 This section does not apply to a parental action or decision that would end
life.  This section does not prohibit a court from issuing an order that is
otherwise permitted by law.
     (3)  No employee of this
state, any political subdivision of this state, or any other governmental
entity, except for law enforcement personnel, shall encourage or coerce a child
to withhold information from the child's parent.  Nor shall any such employee
withhold from a child's parent information that is relevant to the physical,
emotional or mental health of the child.
     SECTION 5.  Educational
Involvement.
     (1)  The board of education
of a school district, in consultation with parents, teachers and
administrators, shall develop and adopt a policy to promote the involvement of
parents of children enrolled in the schools within the school district,
including:
          (a)  A plan for parent
participation in the schools which is designed to improve parent and teacher
cooperation in such areas as homework, attendance and discipline;
          (b)  Procedures by
which a parent may learn about the course of study for that parent's child and
review all curriculum. These procedures shall allow a parent to:
               (i)  Review a
syllabus for each class or course that the parent's child is enrolled in at
least seven (7) days before the start of each class or course.  The syllabus
shall include a written description of all topics and subjects taught in a
class or course, and shall include a list of all curriculum used in the class
or course, the identity of all individuals providing in-person or live remote
instruction in the class or course, and a description of any assemblies, guest
lectures, field trips or other educational activities that are part of the
class or course;
               (ii)  Review all
curriculum for each class or course offered by the school and any teacher
training materials at least three (3) days before the curriculum or materials
being taught or used for instruction is presented to students;
               (iii)  Copy and
record information from the curriculum and teacher training materials; and
               (iv)  Meet with
the teacher of the class or course, the principal, or other representative from
the school to discuss the curriculum and teaching training materials.
          (c)  Procedures to
notify a parent at least three (3) days in advance and obtain the parent's written
consent before the parent's child attends any instruction or presentation that
has the goal or purpose of studying, exploring or informing students about
gender roles or stereotypes, gender identity, gender expression, sexual
orientation or romantic or sexual relationships;
          (d)  Procedures by
which a parent who objects to any specific instruction or presentation on the
basis that it is harmful may withdraw that parent's child from the instruction
or presentation.  Objection to a specific instruction or presentation on the
basis that it is harmful includes, but is not limited to, objection to a
material or activity because it questions beliefs or practices regarding sex,
morality or religion;
          (e)  Procedures by
which a parent may learn about the nature and purpose of clubs and
extracurricular activities that have been approved by the school and may
withdraw that parent's child from any club or extracurricular to which the
parent objects;
          (f)  Procedures by
which a parent must provide written consent before their child uses a name or
nickname other than their legal name, or before a child uses a pronoun that
does not align with the child's sex.  However, even if a parent provides
written consent, no person shall be compelled to use pronouns that do not align
with the child's sex; and
          (g)  Procedures by
which a parent may learn about parental rights and responsibilities under the
laws of this state.
     (2)  The board of education
of a school district may adopt a policy to provide to parents the information
required by this section in an electronic form.
     (3)  A parent shall submit a
written or electronic request for information pursuant to this section to
either the school principal or the superintendent of the school district.  Within
ten (10) days of receiving the request for information, the school principal or
the superintendent shall either deliver the requested information to the parent
or submit to the parent a written explanation of the reasons for the denial of
the requested information.  If the request for information is denied or the
parent does not receive the requested information within fifteen (15) days
after submitting the request for information, the parent may submit a written
request for the information to the board of education of the school district,
which shall formally consider the request at the next scheduled public meeting
of the board if the request can be properly noticed on the agenda.  If the
request cannot be properly noticed on the agenda, the board of education shall
formally consider the request at the next subsequent public meeting of the
board.
     SECTION 6.  Medical
and Mental Health Care.
     (1)  Except as otherwise
provided by law or court order, a person, corporation, association,
organization, state-supported institution or individual employed by any of
these entities must obtain the consent of a parent of a child before taking any
of the following actions:
          (a)  Procuring,
soliciting to perform, arranging for the performance of, providing a referral
for, or performing surgical procedures upon a child;
          (b)  Procuring,
soliciting to perform, arranging for the performance of, providing a referral
for, or performing a physical examination upon a child;
          (c)  Prescribing or
dispensing any medication or prescription drugs to a child; or
          (d)  Procuring,
soliciting to perform, arranging for the performance of, providing a referral
for, or performing a mental health evaluation in a clinical or nonclinical setting,
or mental health treatment on a child.
     (2)  If the parental consent
pursuant to subsection (1) is given through telemedicine, the person or entity
obtaining parental consent must verify the identity of the parent at the site
where the consent is given.
     (3)  The provisions of this
section shall not apply when it has been determined by a physician that:
          (a)  An emergency
exists; and
          (b)  Either of the
following conditions is true:
               (i)  It is
necessary to perform an activity listed in subsection (1) in order to prevent
death or imminent irreparable physical injury to the child; or
               (ii)  A parent of
the child cannot be located or contacted after a reasonably diligent effort.
     (4)  The provisions of this
section do not apply to an abortion, which shall be governed by Chapter 41, Title
41, Mississippi Code of 1972.
     SECTION 7.  Cause
of Action.
     (1)  A parent may bring suit
for any violation of this act and may raise the act as a defense in any
judicial or administrative proceeding without regard to whether the proceeding
is brought by or in the name of the state government, any private person or any
other party.
     (2)  Notwithstanding any
other provision of law, an action under this act may be commenced, and relief
may be granted, without regard to whether the person commencing the action has
sought or exhausted available administrative remedies.
     (3)  Any person who
successfully asserts a claim or defense under this act may recover declaratory
relief, injunctive relief, compensatory damages, reasonable attorneys' fees and
costs, and any other appropriate relief.
     (4)  Sovereign, governmental
and qualified immunities to suit and from liability are waived and abolished to
the extent of liability created by this act.
     SECTION 8.  Rules
of Construction.
     (1)  Unless those rights
have been legally waived or legally terminated, parents have inalienable rights
that are more comprehensive than those listed in this section.  The protections
of the fundamental right of parents to direct the upbringing, education, health
care and mental health of their child afforded by this act are in addition to
the protections provided under federal law, state law, and the state and federal
constitutions.
     (2)  This act shall be
construed in favor of a broad protection of the fundamental right of parents to
direct the upbringing, education, health care and mental health of their child.
     (3)  Nothing in this act
shall be construed to authorize any government to burden the fundamental right
of parents to direct the upbringing, education, health care and mental health
of their child.
     (4)  If a child has no
affirmative right of access to a particular medical or mental health procedure
or service, then nothing in this act shall be construed to grant that child's
parent an affirmative right of access to that procedure or service on that child's
behalf.
     (5)  State statutory law
adopted after the date of the enactment of this act is subject to this act
unless such law explicitly excludes such application by reference to this act.
     SECTION 9.  Section
37-3-49, Mississippi Code of 1972, is amended as follows:
     37-3-49.  (1)  The State
Department of Education shall provide an instructional program and establish
guidelines and procedures for managing such program in the public schools
within the school districts throughout the state as part of the State Program of
Educational Accountability and Assessment of Performance as prescribed in
Section 37-3-46.  Public school districts may (a) elect to adopt the
instructional program and management system provided by the State Department of
Education, or (b) elect to adopt an instructional program and management system
which meets or exceeds criteria established by the State Department of
Education for such.  This provision shall begin with the courses taught in
Grades K-8 which contain skills tested through the Mississippi Basic Skills
Assessment Program and shall proceed through all secondary school courses
mandated for graduation and all secondary school courses in the Mississippi end-of-course
testing program.  Other state core objectives must be included in the district's
instructional program as they are provided by the State Department of Education
along with instructional practices, resources, evaluation items and management
procedures.  Districts are encouraged to adapt this program and accompanying
procedures to all other instructional areas.  The department shall provide that
such program and guidelines, or a program and guidelines developed by a local
school district which incorporates the core objectives from the curriculum
structure are enforced through the performance-based accreditation system.  It
is the intent of the Legislature that every effort be made to protect the
instructional time in the classroom and reduce the amount of paperwork which
must be completed by teachers.  The State Department of Education shall take
steps to insure that school districts properly use staff development time to
work on the districts' instructional management plans.
     (2)  The State Department of
Education shall provide such instructional program and management guidelines
which shall require for every public school district that:
          (a)  All courses taught
in Grades K-8 which contain skills which are tested through the Mississippi
Basic Skills Assessment Program, all secondary school courses mandated for
graduation, and all courses in the end-of-course testing program shall include
the State Department of Education's written list of learning objectives.
          (b)  The local school
board must adopt the objectives that will form the core curriculum which will
be systematically delivered throughout the district.
          (c)  The set of
objectives provided by the State Department of Education must be accompanied by
suggested instructional practices and resources that would help teachers
organize instruction so as to promote student learning of the objectives. 
Objectives added by the school district must also be accompanied by suggested
instructional practices and resources that would help teachers organize
instruction.  The instructional practices and resources that are identified are
to be used as suggestions and not as requirements that teachers must follow. 
The goal of the program is to have students to achieve the desired objective
and not to limit teachers in the way they teach.
          (d)  Standards for
student performance must be established for each core objective in the local
program and those standards establish the district's definition of mastery for
each objective.
          (e)  There shall be an
annual review of student performance in the instructional program against
locally established standards.  When weaknesses exist in the local
instructional program, the district shall take action to improve student
performance.
     (3)  The parent of each
public school student has the right to receive effective communication from the
school principal as to the manner in which instructional materials are used to
implement the school's curricular objectives, in accordance with the provisions
of Section 5 of this act.
     ( * * *34)  The State Board of Education and
the board of trustees of each school district shall adopt policies to limit and
reduce the number and length of written reports that classroom teachers are
required to prepare.
     ( * * *45)  This section shall not be construed
to limit teachers from using their own professional skills to help students
master instructional objectives, nor shall it be construed as a call for more
detailed or complex lesson plans or any increase in testing at the local school
district level.
     ( * * *56)  Districts meeting the highest
levels of accreditation standards, as defined by the State Board of Education,
shall be exempted from the provisions of subsection (2) of this section.  
     SECTION 10.  Section
37-13-173, Mississippi Code of 1972, is amended as follows:
     37-13-173.  (1)  Each
school providing instruction or any other presentation on human sexuality in the
classroom, assembly or other official setting shall be required to provide no less
than * * *one (1) week's
three (3) days' written notice thereof to the parents of children in such
programs of instruction.  The written notice must inform the parents of their right
to request the inclusion of their child for such instruction or presentation.  The
notice also must inform the parents of the right, and the appropriate process, to
review the curriculum and all materials to be used in the lesson or presentation.
     (2)  Upon the written
request of any parent or legal guardian to the school principal to exempt his
or her child from the teaching of reproductive health or any disease, including
HIV/AIDS, in accordance with the provisions of Section 37-13-171, the school
shall excuse the parent's child from such instruction or presentation, without detriment
to the student.
     SECTION 11.  Section
37-15-3, Mississippi Code of 1972, is amended as follows:
     37-15-3.  (1) * * *Such The cumulative folders as are
provided for in Section 37-15-1 shall be kept in the school wherein the pupils
are in attendance.  Both the permanent records and the cumulative folders shall
be available to school officials, including teachers within the school district
who have been determined by the school district to have legitimate educational
interests.  In no case, however, shall such records be available to the general
public.
     (2)  The rights of
students and their parents or legal guardians with respect to education records
created, maintained, or used by public educational institutions and agencies
shall be protected.  Transcripts of courses and grades may be furnished
when requested by the parent or guardian or eligible pupil as prescribed in the
Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act of 1974, as amended, 20 USCS Section
1232g, the implementing regulations issued pursuant thereto, and this section,
provided the following:
          (a)  Students
and their parents shall have the right to access their education records, including
the right to inspect and review those records;
          (b)  Students
and their parents shall have the right to waive their access to their education
records in certain circumstances;
          (c)  Students
and their parents shall have the right to challenge the content of education
records in order to ensure that the records are not inaccurate, misleading or
otherwise a violation of privacy or other rights;
          (d)  Students
and their parents shall have the right of privacy with respect to such records
and reports; and
          (e)  Students
and their parents shall receive annual notice of their rights with respect to
education records.
     (3)  * * *Such The records shall be kept for each
pupil throughout his entire public school enrollment period.  In the event a
pupil transfers to a public school, including a charter school, then the
cumulative folder shall be furnished to the head of the school to which the
pupil transfers; if a pupil transfers to a private school, then a copy of the
cumulative folder shall be furnished to the head of the school to which the
pupil transfers.  The permanent record shall be kept permanently by the school
district from which the pupil transferred.
     (4)  At no time may a
permanent record of a student be destroyed, but cumulative folders may be
destroyed by order of the school board of the school district in not less than
five (5) years after the permanent record of the pupil has become inactive and
has been transferred to the central depository of the district.  * * *Provided, However, * * *that where a school district makes complete
copies of inactive permanent records on photographic film, microfilm * * *, or any other acceptable form of medium for
storage which may be reproduced as needed, * * *such those permanent records may be
destroyed after the photographic film or microfilm copy has been stored in the
central depository of the district.
     SECTION 12.  Section
37-7-301, Mississippi Code of 1972, is brought forward as follows:
     37-7-301.  The school boards
of all school districts shall have the following powers, authority and duties
in addition to all others imposed or granted by law, to wit:
          (a)  To organize and
operate the schools of the district and to make such division between the high
school grades and elementary grades as, in their judgment, will serve the best
interests of the school;
          (b)  To introduce
public school music, art, manual training and other special subjects into
either the elementary or high school grades, as the board shall deem proper;
          (c)  To be the
custodians of real and personal school property and to manage, control and care
for same, both during the school term and during vacation;
          (d)  To have
responsibility for the erection, repairing and equipping of school facilities
and the making of necessary school improvements;
          (e)  To suspend or to
expel a pupil or to change the placement of a pupil to the school district's
alternative school or homebound program for misconduct in the school or on school
property, as defined in Section 37-11-29, on the road to and from school, or at
any school-related activity or event, or for conduct occurring on property
other than school property or other than at a school-related activity or event
when such conduct by a pupil, in the determination of the school superintendent
or principal, renders that pupil's presence in the classroom a disruption to
the educational environment of the school or a detriment to the best interest
and welfare of the pupils and teacher of such class as a whole, and to delegate
such authority to the appropriate officials of the school district;
          (f)  To visit schools
in the district, in their discretion, in a body for the purpose of determining
what can be done for the improvement of the school in a general way;
          (g)  To support, within
reasonable limits, the superintendent, principal and teachers where necessary
for the proper discipline of the school;
          (h)  To exclude from
the schools students with what appears to be infectious or contagious diseases;
provided, however, such student may be allowed to return to school upon presenting
a certificate from a public health officer, duly licensed physician or nurse
practitioner that the student is free from such disease;
          (i)  To require those
vaccinations specified by the State Health Officer as provided in Section 41-23-37;
          (j)  To see that all
necessary utilities and services are provided in the schools at all times when
same are needed;
          (k)  To authorize the
use of the school buildings and grounds for the holding of public meetings and
gatherings of the people under such regulations as may be prescribed by said
board;
          (l)  To prescribe and
enforce rules and regulations not inconsistent with law or with the regulations
of the State Board of Education for their own government and for the government
of the schools, and to transact their business at regular and special meetings
called and held in the manner provided by law;
          (m)  To maintain and
operate all of the schools under their control for such length of time during
the year as may be required;
          (n)  To enforce in the
schools the courses of study and the use of the textbooks prescribed by the proper
authorities;
          (o)  To make orders
directed to the superintendent of schools for the issuance of pay certificates for
lawful purposes on any available funds of the district and to have full control
of the receipt, distribution, allotment and disbursement of all funds provided
for the support and operation of the schools of such school district whether
such funds be derived from state appropriations, local ad valorem tax collections,
or otherwise.  The local school board shall be authorized and empowered to
promulgate rules and regulations that specify the types of claims and set
limits of the dollar amount for payment of claims by the superintendent of
schools to be ratified by the board at the next regularly scheduled meeting
after payment has been made;
          (p)  To select all
school district personnel in the manner provided by law, and to provide for
such employee fringe benefit programs, including accident reimbursement plans, as
may be deemed necessary and appropriate by the board;
          (q)  To provide athletic
programs and other school activities and to regulate the establishment and
operation of such programs and activities;
          (r)  To join, in their
discretion, any association of school boards and other public school-related
organizations, and to pay from local funds other than minimum foundation funds,
any membership dues;
          (s)  To expend local
school activity funds, or other available school district funds, other than
minimum education program funds, for the purposes prescribed under this paragraph. 
"Activity funds" shall mean all funds received by school officials in
all school districts paid or collected to participate in any school activity,
such activity being part of the school program and partially financed with
public funds or supplemented by public funds.  The term "activity funds"
shall not include any funds raised and/or expended by any organization unless
commingled in a bank account with existing activity funds, regardless of
whether the funds were raised by school employees or received by school
employees during school hours or using school facilities, and regardless of
whether a school employee exercises influence over the expenditure or
disposition of such funds.  Organizations shall not be required to make any
payment to any school for the use of any school facility if, in the discretion
of the local school governing board, the organization's function shall be deemed
to be beneficial to the official or extracurricular programs of the school. 
For the purposes of this provision, the term "organization" shall not
include any organization subject to the control of the local school governing
board.  Activity funds may only be expended for any necessary expenses or travel
costs, including advances, incurred by students and their chaperons in attending
any in-state or out-of-state school-related programs, conventions or seminars
and/or any commodities, equipment, travel expenses, purchased services or
school supplies which the local school governing board, in its discretion,
shall deem beneficial to the official or extracurricular programs of the
district, including items which may subsequently become the personal property
of individuals, including yearbooks, athletic apparel, book covers and
trophies.  Activity funds may be used to pay travel expenses of school district
personnel.  The local school governing board shall be authorized and empowered
to promulgate rules and regulations specifically designating for what purposes
school activity funds may be expended.  The local school governing board shall
provide (i) that such school activity funds shall be maintained and expended by
the principal of the school generating the funds in individual bank accounts,
or (ii) that such school activity funds shall be maintained and expended by the
superintendent of schools in a central depository approved by the board.  The
local school governing board shall provide that such school activity funds be
audited as part of the annual audit required in Section 37-9-18.  The State
Department of Education shall prescribe a uniform system of accounting and
financial reporting for all school activity fund transactions;
          (t)  To enter into an
energy performance contract, energy services contract, on a shared-savings,
lease or lease-purchase basis, for energy efficiency services and/or equipment
as provided for in Section 31-7-14;
          (u)  To maintain
accounts and issue pay certificates on school food service bank accounts;
          (v)  (i)  To lease a
school building from an individual, partnership, nonprofit corporation or a
private for-profit corporation for the use of such school district, and to
expend funds therefor as may be available from any nonminimum program sources. 
The school board of the school district desiring to lease a school building
shall declare by resolution that a need exists for a school building and that
the school district cannot provide the necessary funds to pay the cost or its proportionate
share of the cost of a school building required to meet the present needs.  The
resolution so adopted by the school board shall be published once each week for
three (3) consecutive weeks in a newspaper having a general circulation in the
school district involved, with the first publication thereof to be made not
less than thirty (30) days prior to the date upon which the school board is to
act on the question of leasing a school building.  If no petition requesting an
election is filed prior to such meeting as hereinafter provided, then the school
board may, by resolution spread upon its minutes, proceed to lease a school
building.  If at any time prior to said meeting a petition signed by not less
than twenty percent (20%) or fifteen hundred (1500), whichever is less, of the
qualified electors of the school district involved shall be filed with the
school board requesting that an election be called on the question, then the
school board shall, not later than the next regular meeting, adopt a resolution
calling an election to be held within such school district upon the question of
authorizing the school board to lease a school building.  Such election shall
be called and held, and notice thereof shall be given, in the same manner for
elections upon the questions of the issuance of the bonds of school districts,
and the results thereof shall be certified to the school board.  If at least
three-fifths (3/5) of the qualified electors of the school district who voted
in such election shall vote in favor of the leasing of a school building, then
the school board shall proceed to lease a school building.  The term of the
lease contract shall not exceed twenty (20) years, and the total cost of such
lease shall be either the amount of the lowest and best bid accepted by the
school board after advertisement for bids or an amount not to exceed the
current fair market value of the lease as determined by the averaging of at
least two (2) appraisals by certified general appraisers licensed by the State
of Mississippi.  The term "school building" as used in this paragraph
(v)(i) shall be construed to mean any building or buildings used for classroom
purposes in connection with the operation of schools and shall include the site
therefor, necessary support facilities, and the equipment thereof and
appurtenances thereto such as heating facilities, water supply, sewage
disposal, landscaping, walks, drives and playgrounds.  The term "lease"
as used in this paragraph (v)(i) may include a lease-purchase contract;
              (ii)  If two (2) or
more school districts propose to enter into a lease contract jointly, then
joint meetings of the school boards having control may be held but no action
taken shall be binding on any such school district unless the question of leasing
a school building is approved in each participating school district under the
procedure hereinabove set forth in paragraph (v)(i).  All of the provisions of
paragraph (v)(i) regarding the term and amount of the lease contract shall
apply to the school boards of school districts acting jointly.  Any lease contract
executed by two (2) or more school districts as joint lessees shall set out the
amount of the aggregate lease rental to be paid by each, which may be agreed
upon, but there shall be no right of occupancy by any lessee unless the
aggregate rental is paid as stipulated in the lease contract.  All rights of
joint lessees under the lease contract shall be in proportion to the amount of
lease rental paid by each;
          (w)  To employ all
noninstructional and noncertificated employees and fix the duties and compensation
of such personnel deemed necessary pursuant to the recommendation of the
superintendent of schools;
          (x)  To employ and fix
the duties and compensation of such legal counsel as deemed necessary;
          (y)  Subject to rules
and regulations of the State Board of Education, to purchase, own and operate
trucks, vans and other motor vehicles, which shall bear the proper
identification required by law;
          (z)  To expend funds
for the payment of substitute teachers and to adopt reasonable regulations for
the employment and compensation of such substitute teachers;
          (aa)  To acquire in its
own name by purchase all real property which shall be necessary and desirable
in connection with the construction, renovation or improvement of any public
school building or structure.  Whenever the purchase price for such real
property is greater than Fifty Thousand Dollars ($50,000.00), the school board
shall not purchase the property for an amount exceeding the fair market value
of such property as determined by the average of at least two (2) independent
appraisals by certified general appraisers licensed by the State of
Mississippi.  If the board shall be unable to agree with the owner of any such
real property in connection with any such project, the board shall have the power
and authority to acquire any such real property by condemnation proceedings
pursuant to Section 11-27-1 et seq., Mississippi Code of 1972, and for such
purpose, the right of eminent domain is hereby conferred upon and vested in
said board.  Provided further, that the local school board is authorized to
grant an easement for ingress and egress over sixteenth section land or lieu
land in exchange for a similar easement upon adjoining land where the exchange
of easements affords substantial benefit to the sixteenth section land;
provided, however, the exchange must be based upon values as determined by a
competent appraiser, with any differential in value to be adjusted by cash
payment.  Any easement rights granted over sixteenth section land under such authority
shall terminate when the easement ceases to be used for its stated purpose.  No
sixteenth section or lieu land which is subject to an existing lease shall be burdened
by any such easement except by consent of the lessee or unless the school district
shall acquire the unexpired leasehold interest affected by the easement;
          (bb)  To charge
reasonable fees related to the educational programs of the district, in the
manner prescribed in Section 37-7-335;
          (cc)  Subject to rules
and regulations of the State Board of Education, to purchase relocatable
classrooms for the use of such school district, in the manner prescribed in
Section 37-1-13;
          (dd)  Enter into contracts
or agreements with other school districts, political subdivisions or
governmental entities to carry out one or more of the powers or duties of the
school board, or to allow more efficient utilization of limited resources for
providing services to the public;
          (ee)  To provide for in-service
training for employees of the district;
          (ff)  As part of their
duties to prescribe the use of textbooks, to provide that parents and legal
guardians shall be responsible for the textbooks and for the compensation to
the school district for any books which are not returned to the proper schools
upon the withdrawal of their dependent child.  If a textbook is lost or not
returned by any student who drops out of the public school district, the parent
or legal guardian shall also compensate the school district for the fair market
value of the textbooks;
          (gg)  To conduct fund-raising
activities on behalf of the school district that the local school board, in its
discretion, deems appropriate or beneficial to the official or extracurricular
programs of the district; provided that:
              (i)  Any proceeds of
the fund-raising activities shall be treated as "activity funds" and
shall be accounted for as are other activity funds under this section; and
              (ii)  Fund-raising
activities conducted or authorized by the board for the sale of school
pictures, the rental of caps and gowns or the sale of graduation invitations
for which the school board receives a commission, rebate or fee shall contain a
disclosure statement advising that a portion of the proceeds of the sales or
rentals shall be contributed to the student activity fund;
          (hh)  To allow
individual lessons for music, art and other curriculum-related activities for
academic credit or nonacademic credit during school hours and using school
equipment and facilities, subject to uniform rules and regulations adopted by
the school board;
          (ii)  To charge
reasonable fees for participating in an extracurricular activity for academic
or nonacademic credit for necessary and required equipment such as safety equipment,
band instruments and uniforms;
          (jj)  To conduct or
participate in any fund-raising activities on behalf of or in connection with a
tax-exempt charitable organization;
          (kk)  To exercise such
powers as may be reasonably necessary to carry out the provisions of this
section;
          (ll)  To expend funds for
the services of nonprofit arts organizations or other such nonprofit organizations
who provide performances or other services for the students of the school
district;
          (mm)  To expend federal
No Child Left Behind Act funds, or any other available funds that are expressly
designated and authorized for that use, to pay training, educational expenses,
salary incentives and salary supplements to employees of local school districts;
except that incentives shall not be considered part of the local supplement as defined
in Section 37-151-5(o), nor shall incentives be considered part of the local
supplement paid to an individual teacher for the purposes of Section 37-19-7(1). 
Mississippi Adequate Education Program funds or any other state funds may not
be used for salary incentives or salary supplements as provided in this paragraph
(mm);
          (nn)  To use any
available funds, not appropriated or designated for any other purpose, for
reimbursement to the state-licensed employees from both in state and out of
state, who enter into a contract for employment in a school district, for the
expense of moving when the employment necessitates the relocation of the
licensed employee to a different geographical area than that in which the
licensed employee resides before entering into the contract.  The reimbursement
shall not exceed One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) for the documented actual
expenses incurred in the course of relocating, including the expense of any
professional moving company or persons employed to assist with the move, rented
moving vehicles or equipment, mileage in the amount authorized for county and
municipal employees under Section 25-3-41 if the licensed employee used his
personal vehicle or vehicles for the move, meals and such other expenses
associated with the relocation.  No licensed employee may be reimbursed for moving
expenses under this section on more than one (1) occasion by the same school
district.  Nothing in this section shall be construed to require the actual
residence to which the licensed employee relocates to be within the boundaries
of the school district that has executed a contract for employment in order for
the licensed employee to be eligible for reimbursement for the moving expenses. 
However, the licensed employee must relocate within the boundaries of the State
of Mississippi.  Any individual receiving relocation assistance through the
Critical Teacher Shortage Act as provided in Section 37-159-5 shall not be
eligible to receive additional relocation funds as authorized in this paragraph;
          (oo)  To use any
available funds, not appropriated or designated for any other purpose, to
reimburse persons who interview for employment as a licensed employee with the
district for the mileage and other actual expenses incurred in the course of travel
to and from the interview at the rate authorized for county and municipal
employees under Section 25-3-41;
          (pp)  Consistent with
the report of the Task Force to Conduct a Best Financial Management Practices
Review, to improve school district management and use of resources and identify
cost savings as established in Section 8 of Chapter 610, Laws of 2002, local
school boards are encouraged to conduct independent reviews of the management and
efficiency of schools and school districts.  Such management and efficiency
reviews shall provide state and local officials and the public with the
following:
              (i)  An assessment
of a school district's governance and organizational structure;
              (ii)  An assessment
of the school district's financial and personnel management; 
              (iii)  An
assessment of revenue levels and sources;
              (iv)  An assessment
of facilities utilization, planning and maintenance;
              (v)  An assessment
of food services, transportation and safety/security systems;
              (vi)  An assessment
of instructional and administrative technology;
              (vii)  A review of
the instructional management and the efficiency and effectiveness of existing
instructional programs; and
              (viii)  Recommended
methods for increasing efficiency and effectiveness in providing educational
services to the public; 
          (qq)  To enter into agreements
with other local school boards for the establishment of an educational service
agency (ESA) to provide for the cooperative needs of the region in which the
school district is located, as provided in Section 37-7-345;  
          (rr)  To implement a
financial literacy program for students in Grades 10 and 11.  The board may
review the national programs and obtain free literature from various nationally
recognized programs.  After review of the different programs, the board may
certify a program that is most appropriate for the school districts' needs.  If
a district implements a financial literacy program, then any student in Grade
10 or 11 may participate in the program.  The financial literacy program shall
include, but is not limited to, instruction in the same areas of personal
business and finance as required under Section 37-1-3(2)(b).  The school board
may coordinate with volunteer teachers from local community organizations, including,
but not limited to, the following:  United States Department of Agriculture
Rural Development, United States Department of Housing and Urban Development,
Junior Achievement, bankers and other nonprofit organizations.  Nothing in this
paragraph shall be construed as to require school boards to implement a
financial literacy program;
          (ss)  To collaborate
with the State Board of Education, Community Action Agencies or the Department
of Human Services to develop and implement a voluntary program to provide
services for a prekindergarten program that addresses the cognitive, social, and
emotional needs of four-year-old and three-year-old children.  The school board
may utilize any source of available revenue to fund the voluntary program.  Effective with the 2013-2014 school year, to
implement voluntary prekindergarten programs under the Early Learning
Collaborative Act of 2013 pursuant to state funds awarded by the State
Department of Education on a matching basis;
          (tt)  With respect to any lawful, written obligation of a school
district, including, but not limited to, leases (excluding leases of sixteenth
section public school trust land), bonds, notes, or other agreement, to agree
in writing with the obligee that the Department of Revenue or any state agency, department or commission created
under state law may:
              (i)  Withhold all or any part (as agreed by the school
board) of any monies which such local school board is entitled to receive from time
to time under any law and which is in the possession of the Department
of Revenue, or any state agency, department or
commission created under state law; and
              (ii)  Pay the same over to any financial institution,
trustee or other obligee, as directed in writing by the school board, to
satisfy all or part of such obligation of the school district.
     The school board may make such written agreement to
withhold and transfer funds irrevocable for the term of the written obligation
and may include in the written agreement any other terms and provisions
acceptable to the school board.  If the school board files a copy of such written
agreement with the Department of Revenue,
or any state agency, department or commission created under state law then the Department
of Revenue or any state agency, department or
commission created under state law shall immediately make the withholdings
provided in such agreement from the amounts due the local school board and
shall continue to pay the same over to such financial institution, trustee or
obligee for the term of the agreement.
     This paragraph (tt) shall not grant any extra
authority to a school board to issue debt in any amount exceeding statutory
limitations on assessed value of taxable property within such school district or
the statutory limitations on debt maturities, and shall not grant any extra
authority to impose, levy or collect a tax which is not otherwise expressly
provided for, and shall not be construed to apply to sixteenth section public
school trust land;
          (uu)  With respect to any matter or transaction that is
competitively bid by a school district, to accept from any bidder as a good-faith
deposit or bid bond or bid surety, the same type of good-faith deposit or bid
bond or bid surety that may be accepted by the state or any other political
subdivision on similar competitively bid matters or transactions.  This
paragraph (uu) shall not be construed to apply to sixteenth section public
school trust land.  The school board may authorize the investment of any school
district funds in the same kind and manner of investments, including pooled
investments, as any other political subdivision, including community hospitals;
          (vv)  To utilize the alternate method for the conveyance or exchange of
unused school buildings and/or land, reserving a partial or other undivided
interest in the property, as specifically authorized and provided in Section 37-7-485;
          (ww) 
To delegate, privatize or otherwise enter into a contract with private entities
for the operation of any and all functions of nonacademic school process, procedures
and operations including, but not limited to, cafeteria workers, janitorial
services, transportation, professional development, achievement and
instructional consulting services materials and products, purchasing
cooperatives, insurance, business manager services, auditing and accounting
services, school safety/risk prevention, data processing and student records,
and other staff services; however, the authority under this paragraph does not
apply to the leasing, management or operation of sixteenth section lands. 
Local school districts, working through their regional education service
agency, are encouraged to enter into buying consortia with other member districts
for the purposes of more efficient use of state resources as described in
Section 37-7-345;
          (xx)  To partner with entities,
organizations and corporations for the purpose of benefiting the school
district;
          (yy) 
To borrow funds from the Rural Economic Development Authority for the maintenance
of school buildings;
          (zz) 
To fund and operate voluntary early childhood education programs, defined as
programs for children less than five (5) years of age on or before September 1,
and to use any source of revenue for such early childhood education programs. 
Such programs shall not conflict with the Early Learning Collaborative Act of
2013;
          (aaa) 
To issue and provide for the use of procurement cards by school board members,
superintendents and licensed school personnel consistent with the rules and
regulations of the Mississippi Department of Finance and Administration under
Section 31-7-9; and
          (bbb)  To conduct an annual comprehensive evaluation of the
superintendent of schools consistent with the assessment components of paragraph
(pp) of this section and the assessment benchmarks established by the
Mississippi School Board Association to evaluate the success the superintendent
has attained in meeting district goals and objectives, the superintendent's leadership skill and whether
or not the superintendent has established appropriate standards for
performance, is monitoring success and is using data for improvement.
     SECTION 13.  Section
37-13-171, Mississippi Code of 1972, is brought forward as follows:
     37-13-171.  (1)  The local school
board of every public school district shall adopt a policy to implement abstinence-only
or abstinence-plus education into its curriculum by June 30, 2012, which instruction
in those subjects shall be implemented not later than the start of the 2012-2013
school year or the local school board shall adopt the program which has been developed
by the Mississippi Department of Human Services and the Mississippi Department of
Health.  The State Department of Education shall approve each district's curriculum
for sex-related education and shall establish a protocol to be used by districts
to provide continuity in teaching the approved curriculum in a manner that is age,
grade and developmentally appropriate.
     (2)  Abstinence-only education
shall remain the state standard for any sex-related education taught in the public
schools.  For purposes of this section, abstinence-only education includes any type
of instruction or program which, at an appropriate age and grade:
          (a)  Teaches the social,
psychological and health gains to be realized by abstaining from sexual activity,
and the likely negative psychological and physical effects of not abstaining;
          (b)  Teaches the harmful
consequences to the child, the child's parents and society that bearing children
out of wedlock is likely to produce, including the health, educational, financial
and other difficulties the child and his or her parents are likely to face, as well
as the inappropriateness of the social and economic burden placed on others;
          (c)  Teaches that unwanted
sexual advances are irresponsible and teaches how to reject sexual advances and
how alcohol and drug use increases vulnerability to sexual advances;
          (d)  Teaches that abstinence
from sexual activity before marriage, and fidelity within marriage, is the only
certain way to avoid out-of-wedlock pregnancy, sexually transmitted diseases and
related health problems.  The instruction or program may include a discussion on
condoms or contraceptives, but only if that discussion includes a factual presentation
of the risks and failure rates of those contraceptives.  In no case shall the instruction
or program include any demonstration of how condoms or other contraceptives are
applied;
          (e)  Teaches the current
state law related to sexual conduct, including forcible rape, statutory rape, paternity
establishment, child support and homosexual activity; and
          (f)  Teaches that a mutually
faithful, monogamous relationship in the context of marriage is the only appropriate
setting for sexual intercourse.
     (3)  A program or instruction
on sex-related education need not include every component listed in subsection (2)
of this section for abstinence-only education.  However, no program or instruction
under an abstinence-only curriculum may include anything that contradicts the excluded
components.  For purposes of this section, abstinence-plus education includes every
component listed under subsection (2) of this section that is age and grade appropriate,
in addition to any other programmatic or instructional component approved by the
department, which shall not include instruction and demonstrations on the application
and use of condoms.  Abstinence-plus education may discuss other contraceptives,
the nature, causes and effects of sexually transmitted diseases, or the prevention
of sexually transmitted diseases, including HIV/AIDS, along with a factual presentation
of the risks and failure rates.
     (4)  Any course containing sex-related
education offered in the public schools shall include instruction in either abstinence-only
or abstinence-plus education.
     (5)  Local school districts,
in their discretion, may host programs designed to teach parents how to discuss
abstinence with their children.
     (6)  There shall be no effort
in either an abstinence-only or an abstinence-plus curriculum to teach that abortion
can be used to prevent the birth of a baby.
     (7)  At all times when sex-related
education is discussed or taught, boys and girls shall be separated according to
gender into different classrooms, sex-related education instruction may not be conducted
when boys and girls are in the company of any students of the opposite gender.
     (8)  This section shall stand
repealed on July 1, 2024.
     SECTION 14.  Section
43-21-105, Mississippi Code of 1972, is brought forward as follows:
     43-21-105.  The following
words and phrases, for purposes of this chapter, shall have the meanings
ascribed herein unless the context clearly otherwise requires:
          (a)  "Youth court"
means the Youth Court Division.
          (b)  "Judge"
means the judge of the Youth Court Division.
          (c)  "Designee"
means any person that the judge appoints to perform a duty which this chapter
requires to be done by the judge or his designee.  The judge may not appoint a
person who is involved in law enforcement or who
is an employee of the Mississippi Department of Human Services or the
Mississippi Department of Child Protection Services to be his designee.
          (d)  "Child"
and "youth" are synonymous, and each means a person who has not
reached his eighteenth birthday.  A child who has not reached his eighteenth
birthday and is on active duty for a branch of the armed services or is married
is not considered a "child" or "youth" for the purposes of
this chapter.
          (e)  "Parent"
means the father or mother to whom the child has been born, or the father or
mother by whom the child has been legally adopted.
          (f)  "Guardian"
means a court-appointed guardian of the person of a child.
          (g)  "Custodian"
means any person having the present care or custody of a child whether such
person be a parent or otherwise.
          (h)  "Legal
custodian" means a court-appointed custodian of the child.
          (i)  "Delinquent
child" means a child who has reached his tenth birthday and who has
committed a delinquent act.
          (j)  "Delinquent
act" is any act, which if committed by an adult, is designated as a crime
under state or federal law, or municipal or county ordinance other than
offenses punishable by life imprisonment or death.  A delinquent act includes
escape from lawful detention and violations of the Uniform Controlled
Substances Law and violent behavior.
          (k)  "Child in
need of supervision" means a child who has reached his seventh birthday
and is in need of treatment or rehabilitation because the child:
              (i)  Is habitually
disobedient of reasonable and lawful commands of his parent, guardian or custodian
and is ungovernable; or
              (ii)  While being
required to attend school, willfully and habitually violates the rules thereof
or willfully and habitually absents himself therefrom; or
              (iii)  Runs away from
home without good cause; or
              (iv)  Has committed
a delinquent act or acts.
          (l)  "Neglected
child" means a child:
              (i)  Whose parent,
guardian or custodian or any person responsible for his care or support,
neglects or refuses, when able so to do, to provide for him proper and
necessary care or support, or education as required by law, or medical,
surgical, or other care necessary for his well-being; however, a parent who
withholds medical treatment from any child who in good faith is under treatment
by spiritual means alone through prayer in accordance with the tenets and
practices of a recognized church or religious denomination by a duly accredited
practitioner thereof shall not, for that reason alone, be considered to be
neglectful under any provision of this chapter; or
              (ii)  Who is otherwise
without proper care, custody, supervision or support; or
              (iii)  Who, for any
reason, lacks the special care made necessary for him by reason of his mental
condition, whether the mental condition is having mental illness or having an
intellectual disability; or
              (iv)  Who, for any
reason, lacks the care necessary for his health, morals or well-being.
          (m)  "Abused child"
means a child whose parent, guardian or custodian or any person responsible for
his care or support, whether legally obligated to do so or not, has caused or
allowed to be caused, upon the child, sexual abuse, sexual exploitation,
commercial sexual exploitation, emotional abuse, mental injury, nonaccidental
physical injury or other maltreatment.  However, physical discipline, including
spanking, performed on a child by a parent, guardian or custodian in a reasonable
manner shall not be deemed abuse under this section.  "Abused child" also means a child who is or has been trafficked
within the meaning of the Mississippi Human Trafficking Act by any person,
without regard to the relationship of the person to the child.
          (n)  "Sexual abuse"
means obscene or pornographic photographing, filming or depiction of children
for commercial purposes, or the rape, molestation, incest, prostitution or
other such forms of sexual exploitation of children under circumstances which
indicate that the child's health or welfare is harmed or threatened.
          (o)  "A child in
need of special care" means a child with any mental or physical illness
that cannot be treated with the dispositional alternatives ordinarily available
to the youth court.
          (p)  A "dependent
child" means any child who is not a child in need of supervision, a
delinquent child, an abused child or a neglected child, and which child has been
voluntarily placed in the custody of the Department of Child Protection
Services by his parent, guardian or custodian.
          (q)  "Custody"
means the physical possession of the child by any person.
          (r)  "Legal custody"
means the legal status created by a court order which gives the legal custodian
the responsibilities of physical possession of the child and the duty to
provide him with food, shelter, education and reasonable medical care, all
subject to residual rights and responsibilities of the parent or guardian of
the person.
          (s)  "Detention"
means the care of children in physically restrictive facilities.
          (t)  "Shelter"
means care of children in physically nonrestrictive facilities.
          (u)  "Records involving
children" means any of the following from which the child can be
identified:
              (i)  All youth
court records as defined in Section 43-21-251;
              (ii)  All forensic
interviews conducted by a child advocacy center in abuse and neglect investigations;
              (iii)  All law
enforcement records as defined in Section 43-21-255;
              (iv)  All agency
records as defined in Section 43-21-257; and
              (v)  All other
documents maintained by any representative of the state, county, municipality
or other public agency insofar as they relate to the apprehension, custody, adjudication
or disposition of a child who is the subject of a youth court cause.
          (v)  "Any person
responsible for care or support" means the person who is providing for the
child at a given time.  This term shall include, but is not limited to, stepparents,
foster parents, relatives, nonlicensed babysitters or other similar persons
responsible for a child and staff of residential care facilities and group
homes that are licensed by the Department of Human Services or the Department
of Child Protection Services.
          (w)  The singular
includes the plural, the plural the singular and the masculine the feminine
when consistent with the intent of this chapter.
          (x)  "Out-of-home"
setting means the temporary supervision or care of children by the staff of licensed
day care centers, the staff of public, private and state schools, the staff of
juvenile detention facilities, the staff of unlicensed residential care
facilities and group homes and the staff of, or individuals representing,
churches, civic or social organizations.
          (y)  "Durable
legal custody" means the legal status created by a court order which gives
the durable legal custodian the responsibilities of physical possession of the
child and the duty to provide him with care, nurture, welfare, food, shelter,
education and reasonable medical care.  All these duties as enumerated are
subject to the residual rights and responsibilities of the natural parent(s) or
guardian(s) of the child or children.
          (z)  "Status
offense" means conduct subject to adjudication by the youth court that
would not be a crime if committed by an adult.
          (aa)  "Financially
able" means a parent or child who is ineligible for a court-appointed
attorney.
          (bb)  "Assessment"
means an individualized examination of a child to determine the child's
psychosocial needs and problems, including the type and extent of any mental
health, substance abuse or co-occurring mental health and substance abuse
disorders and recommendations for treatment.  The term includes, but is not
limited to, a drug and alcohol, psychological or psychiatric evaluation,
records review, clinical interview or the administration of a formal test and
instrument.
          (cc)  "Screening"
means a process, with or without the administration of a formal instrument,
that is designed to identify a child who is at increased risk of having mental
health, substance abuse or co-occurring mental health and substance abuse
disorders that warrant immediate attention, intervention or more comprehensive
assessment.
          (dd)  "Durable legal
relative guardianship" means the legal status created by a youth court
order that conveys the physical and legal custody of a child or children by
durable legal guardianship to a relative or fictive kin who is licensed as a
foster or resource parent.
          (ee)  "Relative"
means a person related to the child by affinity or consanguinity within the
third degree.
          (ff)  "Fictive kin"
means a person not related to the child legally or biologically but who is considered
a relative due to a significant, familial-like and ongoing relationship with
the child and family.
          (gg)  "Reasonable
efforts" means the exercise of reasonable care and due diligence by the
Department of Human Services, the Department of Child Protection Services, or
any other appropriate entity or person to use appropriate and available
services to prevent the unnecessary removal of the child from the home or
provide other services related to meeting the needs of the child and the
parents.
          (hh)  "Commercial
sexual exploitation" means any sexual act or crime of a sexual nature,
which is committed against a child for financial or economic gain, to obtain a
thing of value for quid pro quo exchange of property or for any other purpose.
     SECTION 15.  This act
shall take effect and be in force from and after July 1, 2023.







MISSISSIPPI LEGISLATURE
2023 Regular Session
To: Insurance
By: Senator(s) Sojourner, Chism, McDaniel
Senate Bill 2861
AN ACT TO AMEND SECTION 83-9-22, MISSISSIPPI CODE OF 1972,
TO PROHIBIT A HEALTH COVERAGE PLAN UNDER AN INSURANCE POLICY OR OTHER PLAN
PROVIDING HEALTHCARE COVERAGE IN THIS STATE FROM BEING REQUIRED TO PROVIDE
COVERAGE FOR ANY GENDER REASSIGNMENT SURGERY OR SERVICE; AND FOR RELATED
PURPOSES.
     BE IT ENACTED BY THE
LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF MISSISSIPPI:
     SECTION 1.  Section
83-9-22, Mississippi Code of 1972, is amended as follows:
     83-9-22.  (1)  (a)  Notwithstanding
any other provision of the law to the contrary, except as otherwise provided in
subsection (3) of this section, no health coverage plan shall restrict coverage
for medically appropriate treatment prescribed by a physician and agreed to by a
fully informed insured, or if the insured lacks legal capacity to consent by a person
who has legal authority to consent on his or her behalf, based on an insured's diagnosis
with a terminal condition.  Refusing to pay for treatment rendered to an insured
near the end of life that is consistent with best practices for treatment of a disease
or condition, approved uses of a drug or device, or uses supported by peer reviewed
medical literature, is a per se violation of this section.
          (b)  Violations of this
section shall constitute an unfair trade practice and subject the violator to the
penalties provided by law.
          (c)  As used in this section
"terminal condition" means any aggressive malignancy, chronic end-stage
cardiovascular or cerebral vascular disease, or any other disease, illness or condition
which a physician diagnoses as terminal.
          (d)  As used in this section,
a "health coverage plan" shall mean any hospital, health or medical expense
insurance policy, hospital or medical service contract, employee welfare benefit
plan, contract or agreement with a health maintenance organization or a preferred
provider organization, health and accident insurance policy, or any other insurance
contract of this type, including a group insurance plan and the State Health and
Life Insurance Plan.
     (2)  (a)  Notwithstanding any
other provision of the law to the contrary, no health benefit paid directly or indirectly
with state funds, specifically Medicaid, shall restrict coverage for medically appropriate
treatment prescribed by a physician and agreed to by a fully informed individual,
or if the individual lacks legal capacity to consent by a person who has legal authority
to consent on his or her behalf, based on an individual's diagnosis with a terminal
condition.
          (b)  Refusing to pay for
treatment rendered to an individual near the end of life that is consistent with
best practices for treatment of a disease or condition, approved uses of a drug
or device, or uses supported by peer reviewed medical literature, is a per se violation
of this section.
          (c)  As used in this section
"terminal condition" means any aggressive malignancy, chronic end-stage
cardiovascular or cerebral vascular disease, or any other disease, illness or condition
which a physician diagnoses as terminal.
     (3)  This section does not require
a health coverage plan to cover and pay for the treatment of a person who is a cardholder
and registered qualifying patient with medical cannabis that is lawful under the
Mississippi Medical Cannabis Act and in compliance with rules and regulations adopted
thereunder.
     (4)  A health coverage plan
under an insurance policy or other plan providing healthcare coverage in this state
shall not be required to provide coverage for any gender reassignment surgery or
service.  As used in this section, "Gender reassignment surgery or service"
means any medical or surgical service that seeks to surgically alter or otherwise
remove healthy physical or anatomical characteristics or features that are typical
for the individual's biological sex in order to instill or create physiological
or anatomical characteristics that resemble a sex different from the individual's
biological sex, including without limitation, genital or nongenital gender reassignment
surgery performed for the purpose of assisting an individual with a gender transition.
     SECTION 2.  This act
shall take effect and be in force from and after July 1, 2023.










2023-2024 Bill 243 Text of Previous Version (Dec. 02, 2022) - South Carolina Legislature Online
 

South Carolina General Assembly125th Session, 2023-2024Bill 243Indicates Matter StrickenIndicates New Matter(Text matches printed bills. Document has been reformatted to meet World Wide Web specifications.)








A bill

to amend the South Carolina Code of Laws by adding Section 40-47-205, RELATING TO GENERAL PROVISIONS CONCERNING PHYSICIANS, so as to PROHIBIT PHYSICIANS FROM PERFORMING GENDER REASSIGNMENT SURGERY ON MINORS, AND TO PROHIBIT PHYSICIANS FROM PRESCRIBING OR ADMINISTERING CERTAIN SUBSTANCES FOR THE PURPOSE OF ATTEMPTING TO ALTER THE APPEARANCE OF OR AFFIRM THE MINOR’S PERCEPTION OF HIS GENDER IF THAT APPEARANCE OR PERCEPTION IS INCONSISTENT WITH THE MINOR’S BIOLOGICAL SEX.

Be it enacted by the General Assembly of the State of South Carolina:

SECTION 1.	Article 1, Chapter 47, Title 40 of the S.C. Code is amended by adding:

 Section 4047205.	(A) For the purposes of this section:
  (1) “Biological sex” means the biological indication of male and female in the context of reproductive potential or capacity, such as sex chromosomes, naturally occurring sex hormones, gonads and nonambiguous internal and external genitalia present at birth, without regard to an individual’s psychological, chosen, or subjective experience of gender.
  (2) “Gender” means the psychological, behavioral, social, and cultural aspects of being male or female.
  (3) “Gender transition” means the process in which a person goes from identifying with and living as a gender that corresponds to the person’s biological sex to identifying with and living as a gender different from the person’s biological sex and may involve social, legal, or physical changes.
  (4) “Irreversible gender reassignment surgery” means a medical procedure performed for the purpose of assisting an individual with a gender transition, including, but not limited to:
   (a) penectomy, orchiectomy, vaginoplasty, clitoroplasty, or vulvoplasty for biologically male patients or hysterectomy or ovariectomy for biologically female patients;
   (b) metoidioplasty, phalloplasty, vaginectomy, scrotoplasty, or implantation of erection or testicular prostheses for biologically female patients; and
   (c) augmentation mammoplasty for biologically male patients and subcutaneous mastectomy for female patients.
 (B) A physician may not provide irreversible reassignment surgery to a minor.
 (C) A physician may not prescribe or administer puberty blocking medication to stop or delay normal puberty, supraphysiologic doses of testosterone or other androgens to females, or supraphysiologic doses of estrogen to males for the purpose of attempting to alter the appearance of or affirm the minor’s perception of his gender if that appearance or perception is inconsistent with the minor’s biological sex.
 (D) A physician may provide to a minor:
  (1) services to a minor born with a medically verifiable disorder of sex development, including, but not limited to, an individual with external biological sex characteristics that are irresolvably ambiguous;
  (2) services provided when a physician has otherwise diagnosed a disorder of sexual development and has determined through genetic or biochemical testing that the individual does not have normal sex chromosome structure, sex steroid hormone production or sex steroid hormone action;
  (3) treatment for an infection, injury, disease, or disorder that has been caused or exacerbated by the performance of a gender transition procedure, whether or not the gender transition procedure was performed in accordance with state or federal law; and
  (4) any procedure undertaken because the minor suffers from a physical disorder, physical injury, or physical illness that would place the individual in imminent danger of death or the impairment of a major bodily function unless surgery is performed.

SECTION 2.	This act takes effect upon approval by the Governor.
XX
----XX----This web page was last updated on December 02, 2022 at 10:27 AM








2023-2024 Bill 3551 Text of Previous Version (Dec. 15, 2022) - South Carolina Legislature Online
 

South Carolina General Assembly125th Session, 2023-2024Bill 3551Indicates Matter StrickenIndicates New Matter(Text matches printed bills. Document has been reformatted to meet World Wide Web specifications.)








A bill

to amend the South Carolina Code of Laws BY ENACTING THE "SOUTH CAROLINA VULNERABLE CHILD COMPASSION AND PROTECTION ACT"; AND BY ADDING CHAPTER 140 TO TITLE 44 SO AS TO PROHIBIT THE PERFORMANCE OF A MEDICAL PROCEDURE OR THE PRESCRIPTION OR ISSUANCE OF MEDICATION, UPON OR TO A MINOR, THAT IS INTENDED TO ALTER THE APPEARANCE OF THE MINOR'S GENDER OR DELAY PUBERTY, WITH EXCEPTIONS; TO AUTHORIZE PROFESSIONAL DISCIPLINARY ACTION and the right to institute a civil action FOR VIOLATIONS OF THE CHAPTER; AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES.

Be it enacted by the General Assembly of the State of South Carolina:

SECTION 1.This act may be cited as the "South Carolina Vulnerable Child Compassion and Protection Act".

SECTION 2.Title 44 of the S.C. Code is amended by adding:

CHAPTER 140

South Carolina Vulnerable Child Compassion and Protection Act

Section 44-140-10.For the purposes of this chapter: 
(1)"Minor" means a person who is under the age of eighteen.
(2)"Person" means any of the following: 
(a)any individual;
(b)any agent, employee, official, or contractor of any legal entity; or
(c)any agent, employee, official, or contractor of a school district or the State or any of its political subdivisions or agencies.
(3)"Sex" means the biological indication of male and female, including sex chromosomes, naturally occurring sex hormones, gonads, and nonambiguous internal and external genitalia present at birth, without regard to an individual's psychological, chosen, or subjective experience of gender.

Section 44-140-20.(A)Except as provided in subsection (B), no person shall knowingly perform, or engage in conduct that aids or abets any of the following practices to be performed, upon a minor if the practice is performed for the purpose of attempting to alter the appearance of or affirm the minor's perception of the minor's gender or sex, if that perception is inconsistent with the minor's sex as defined in this chapter:
(1)prescribing, dispensing, administering, or otherwise supplying puberty-blocking medication to stop or delay normal puberty;
(2)prescribing, dispensing, administering, or otherwise supplying supraphysiologic doses of testosterone or other androgens to females;
(3)prescribing, dispensing, administering, or otherwise supplying supraphysiologic doses of estrogen to males;
(4)performing surgeries that sterilize, including castration, vasectomy, hysterectomy, oophorectomy, orchiectomy, and penectomy;
(5)performing surgeries that artificially construct tissue with the appearance of genitalia that differs from the individual's sex, including metoidioplasty, phalloplasty, and vaginoplasty; or
(6)removing any healthy or nondiseased body part or tissue. 
(B)(1)Subsection (A) does not apply to a procedure undertaken to treat a minor born with a medically verifiable disorder of sex development, including either of the following:
(a)an individual born with external biological sex characteristics that are ambiguous and the ambiguity is unresolvable, including an individual born with forty-six XX chromosomes with virilization, forty-six XY chromosomes with undervirilization, or having both ovarian and testicular tissue; or
(b)an individual whom a physician has otherwise diagnosed with a disorder of sexual development, in which the physician has determined through genetic or biochemical testing that the person does not have normal sex chromosome structure, sex steroid hormone production, or sex steroid hormone action for a male or female.
(2) Subsection (A) does not apply to a medical procedure undertaken to treat a minor for a condition that is a consequence of undergoing a prohibited practice prior to the effective date of this chapter, including, but not limited to, an infection resulting from gender-transition surgery. 
(C)Violation of this section constitutes misconduct under Section 40-47-110 and is grounds for disciplinary action by the Board of Medical Examiners up to and including revocation of the authorization to practice medicine.

Section 44-140-30.A nurse, counselor, teacher, principal, or other administrative official at a public or private school attended by a minor is prohibited from doing either of the following:
(1)encouraging or coercing a minor to withhold from the minor's parent or legal guardian the fact that the minor's perception of the minor's gender or sex is inconsistent with the minor's sex; and
(2)withholding from a minor's parent or legal guardian information related to a minor's perception that the minor's gender or sex is inconsistent with the minor's sex.

Section 44-140-40.(A) A civil action for damages or injunctive relief, or both, may be brought by a parent or legal guardian of a minor who was the subject of a violation of Section 44-140-20 or 44-140-30.
(B) In an action brought pursuant to this section, the parent or legal guardian may recover threefold the party's actual damages sustained but in no case may recovery be less than five thousand dollars, along with the costs of the action and reasonable attorney's fees. Such damages are cumulative and in no way limited by any other remedies which may be available under any other federal, state, or municipal law. A court considering such civil action also may award injunctive relief.


SECTION 3.The repeal or amendment by this act of any law, whether temporary or permanent or civil or criminal, does not affect pending actions, rights, duties, or liabilities founded thereon, or alter, discharge, release or extinguish any penalty, forfeiture, or liability incurred under the repealed or amended law, unless the repealed or amended provision shall so expressly provide.  After the effective date of this act, all laws repealed or amended by this act must be taken and treated as remaining in full force and effect for the purpose of sustaining any pending or vested right, civil action, special proceeding, criminal prosecution, or appeal existing as of the effective date of this act, and for the enforcement of rights, duties, penalties, forfeitures, and liabilities as they stood under the repealed or amended laws.

SECTION 4.If any section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, clause, phrase, or word of this act is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid, such holding shall not affect the constitutionality or validity of the remaining portions of this act, the General Assembly hereby declaring that it would have passed this act, and each and every section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, clause, phrase, and word thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more other sections, subsections, paragraphs, subparagraphs, sentences, clauses, phrases, or words hereof may be declared to be unconstitutional, invalid, or otherwise ineffective.

SECTION 5.This act takes effect after approval by the Governor.
----XX----
This web page was last updated on December 15, 2022 at 03:14 PM





MISSISSIPPI LEGISLATURE
2023 Regular Session
To: Judiciary B
By: Representative Hobgood-Wilkes
House Bill 1476
AN ACT TO ESTABLISH THE "FAMILIES' RIGHTS AND
RESPONSIBILITIES ACT OF 2023"; TO DEFINE TERMINOLOGY USED HEREIN; TO
ESTABLISH THAT A PARENT'S LIBERTY TO DIRECT THE UPBRINGING, EDUCATION, HEALTH
CARE AND MENTAL HEALTH OF HIS OR HER CHILD IS A FUNDAMENTAL RIGHT; TO PROHIBIT
THE STATE OR ANY POLITICAL SUBDIVISION THEREOF FROM SUBSTANTIALLY BURDENING A
PARENT'S FUNDAMENTAL RIGHT WITHOUT DEMONSTRATING THAT THE BURDEN IS REQUIRED BY
A COMPELLING GOVERNMENTAL INTEREST; TO PROVIDE THAT ALL PARENTAL RIGHTS ARE
EXCLUSIVELY RESERVED TO A PARENT OF A CHILD WITHOUT OBSTRUCTION BY OR
INTERFERENCE FROM THE STATE OR ANY POLITICAL SUBDIVISION THEREOF; TO PROVIDE
THAT ABUSE OR NEGLECT OF A CHILD BY A PARENT OR THE ACTION OR DECISION OF A
PARENT THAT WOULD END LIFE ARE NOT AUTHORIZED BY THIS ACT; TO PROHIBIT
EMPLOYEES OF THIS STATE AND ANY POLITICAL SUBDIVISION THEREOF, EXCEPT FOR LAW
ENFORCEMENT PERSONNEL, FROM ENCOURAGING OR COERCING A CHILD TO WITHHOLD
INFORMATION FROM THE CHILD'S PARENT; TO FURTHER PROHIBIT SUCH EMPLOYEES FROM WITHHOLDING
INFORMATION THAT IS RELEVANT TO A CHILD'S PHYSICAL, EMOTIONAL OR MENTAL HEALTH
FROM A CHILD'S PARENT; TO REQUIRE THE BOARD OF EDUCATION OF A SCHOOL DISTRICT
TO DEVELOP AND ADOPT A POLICY TO PROMOTE THE INVOLVEMENT OF PARENTS OF CHILDREN
ENROLLED IN THE DISTRICT'S SCHOOLS; TO PRESCRIBE THE MINIMUM REQUIREMENT
PROCEDURES TO BE ADDRESSED BY THE POLICY; TO PROVIDE THE BOARD OF EDUCATION OF
A SCHOOL DISTRICT WITH THE DISCRETION TO ADOPT A POLICY TO PROVIDE TO PARENTS
THE INFORMATION IN AN ELECTRONIC FORM; TO REQUIRE PARENTS TO SUBMIT A WRITTEN
OR ELECTRONIC REQUEST FOR THE CHILD'S INFORMATION TO THE SCHOOL PRINCIPAL OR
THE SUPERINTENDENT OF THE SCHOOL DISTRICT; TO REQUIRE THE SCHOOL PRINCIPAL OR
SUPERINTENDENT TO PROVIDE THE REQUESTED INFORMATION TO THE PARENTS WITHIN TEN
DAYS OF RECEIVING THE REQUEST, OR SUBMIT TO THE PARENT A WRITTEN EXPLANATION OF
THE REASONS FOR THE DENIAL OF THE REQUESTED INFORMATION; TO PRESCRIBE THE
PROCESS BY WHICH A PARENT MAY SUBMIT A FORMAL CONSIDERATION OF THE REQUEST OF INFORMATION
WITH THE SCHOOL BOARD IF THE REQUESTED INFORMATION IS NOT RECEIVED 15 DAYS
AFTER SUBMITTING THE INITIAL REQUEST; TO STIPULATE THE LIMITATIONS PLACED UPON
PERSONS, CORPORATIONS, ASSOCIATIONS, ORGANIZATIONS, STATE SUPPORTED
INSTITUTIONS OR INDIVIDUALS EMPLOYED BY ANY OF THESE ENTITIES TO PROVIDE ANY
MEDICAL OR MENTAL HEALTH SERVICE OR PROCEDURE ON A CHILD WITHOUT FIRST
OBTAINING THE CONSENT OF THE CHILD'S PARENT, EXCEPT AS OTHERWISE PROVIDED BY
LAW OR COURT ORDER; TO PRESCRIBE EXCEPTIONS TO THE LIMITATION WHEN PARENTAL
CONSENT IS NOT CAPABLE OF BEING GIVEN OR IN EMERGENCY SITUATIONS WHEN IMMINENT
BODILY HARM OR DEATH COULD RESULT; TO SPECIFY THE MANNER BY WHICH PARENTAL
CONSENT MUST BE VERIFIED IF TELEMEDICINE IS PROVIDED; TO ESTABLISH A CAUSE OF ACTION
FOR VIOLATION OF THIS ACT; TO PROVIDE THAT THIS ACT SHALL SERVE AS A DEFENSE TO
ANY CAUSE OF ACTION THAT IS RAISED AS A RESULT OF A VIOLATION THEREOF; TO PROVIDE
THAT THE RULES OF CONSTRUCTION SHALL PROVIDE BROAD PROTECTION OF A PARENT'S FUNDAMENTAL
RIGHTS AS INALIENABLE UNLESS THOSE RIGHTS HAVE BEEN LEGALLY WAIVED OR LEGALLY TERMINATED;
TO AMEND SECTION 37-3-49, MISSISSIPPI CODE OF 1972, TO PROVIDE THE PARENT OF
EACH PUBLIC SCHOOL STUDENT WITH THE RIGHT TO RECEIVE EFFECTIVE COMMUNICATION
FROM THE SCHOOL PRINCIPAL AS TO THE MANNER IN WHICH INSTRUCTIONAL MATERIALS ARE
USED TO IMPLEMENT THE SCHOOL'S CURRICULAR OBJECTIVES; TO AMEND SECTION 37-13-173,
MISSISSIPPI CODE OF 1972, TO PROVIDE PARENTS THE AUTHORITY TO OPT THEIR
CHILDREN OUT OF ANY INSTRUCTION OF THE SCHOOL DISTRICT'S COMPREHENSIVE HEALTH
EDUCATION RELATING TO SEX EDUCATION UPON SUBMITTING A WRITTEN REQUEST TO THE
SCHOOL PRINCIPAL; TO AMEND SECTION 37-15-3, MISSISSIPPI CODE OF 1972, TO
PROVIDE THAT STUDENT AND PARENTAL RIGHTS TO EDUCATION RECORDS CREATED, MAINTAINED,
OR USED BY PUBLIC EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS AND AGENCIES SHALL BE PROTECTED; TO STIPULATE
THAT STUDENTS AND THEIR PARENTS MAINTAIN THE RIGHT TO ACCESS THE STUDENT'S EDUCATIONAL
RECORDS, WAIVE ACCESS TO SUCH RECORDS, CHALLENGE THE CONTENT OF SUCH RECORDS, PRIVACY
OF SUCH RECORDS AND TO RECEIVE ANNUAL NOTICE OF THE RIGHTS TO SUCH RECORDS; TO
BRING FORWARD SECTIONS 37-7-301, 37-13-171 AND 43-21-105, MISSISSIPPI CODE OF
1972, FOR PURPOSES OF POSSIBLE AMENDMENTS; AND FOR RELATED PURPOSES.
     BE IT ENACTED BY THE
LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF MISSISSIPPI:
     SECTION 1.  This
act shall be known and may be cited as the "Families' Rights and Responsibilities
Act of 2023."
     SECTION 2.  As
used in this act, the following terms shall have the meaning ascribed in this section
unless context of usage requires otherwise:
          (a)  "Child"
means an individual under the age of eighteen (18).  The term does not include any
child who has been adjudicated as a legally emancipated minor in accordance with
state law by a court of competent jurisdiction.
          (b)  "Curriculum"
includes all textbooks, reading materials, handouts, videos, presentations,
digital materials, websites, online applications, digital applications for a
phone, laptop or tablet, questionnaires, surveys, or other written or
electronic materials that have been or will be assigned, distributed or
otherwise presented physically or virtually to students in a class or course.
          (c)  "Educational
records" includes attendance records, test scores of school-administered
tests and state-wide assessments, grades, extracurricular activity or club
participation, e-mail accounts, online or virtual accounts or data,
disciplinary records, counseling records, psychological records, applications
for admission, health and immunization information including any medical
records maintained by a health clinic or medical facility operated or
controlled by the school district or located on district property, teacher and
counselor evaluations, and reports of behavioral patterns.
          (d)  "Parent"
means a biological parent of a child, an adoptive parent of a child, or an
individual who has been granted exclusive right, guardianship and authority
over the welfare of a child under state law.
          (e)  "Substantial
burden" means any action that directly or indirectly constrains, inhibits,
curtails, or denies the right of a parent to direct the upbringing, education,
health care and mental health of that parent's child, or compels any action
contrary to the right of a parent to direct the upbringing, education, health
care and mental health of that parent's child. The term includes, but is not
limited to, withholding benefits, assessing criminal, civil or administrative
penalties or damages, or exclusion from governmental assistance programs.
     SECTION 3.  Parental
Rights are Fundamental.
     (1)  The liberty of a parent to direct the upbringing, education,
health care and mental health of that parent's child is a fundamental right.
     (2)  This state, any
political subdivision of this state or any other governmental entity shall not
substantially burden the fundamental right of a parent to direct the
upbringing, education, health care and mental health of that parent's child
without demonstrating that the burden is required by a compelling governmental interest
of the highest order as applied to the parent and the child and is the least
restrictive means of furthering that compelling governmental interest.
     SECTION 4.  Rights
and Responsibilities.
     (1)  All parental rights are
exclusively reserved to a parent of a child without obstruction by or
interference from this state, any political subdivision of this state, any
other governmental entity or any other institution, including without limitation,
the following rights and responsibilities:
          (a)  To direct the
education of the child, including the right to choose public, private,
religious or home schools, and the right to make reasonable choices within
public schools for the education of the child;
          (b)  To access and
review all written and electronic educational records relating to the child
that are controlled by or in the possession of a school;
          (c)  To direct the
upbringing of the child;
          (d)  To direct the moral
or religious training of the child;
          (e)  To make and
consent in writing to all physical and mental health care decisions for the
child;
          (f)  To access and
review all health and medical records of the child;
          (g)  To consent in
writing before a biometric scan of the child is made, shared or stored;
          (h)  To consent in writing
before any record of the child's blood or deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) is created,
stored or shared, unless authorized pursuant to a court order;
          (i)  To consent in
writing before any governmental entity makes a video or voice recording of the
child, unless the video or voice recording is made during or as a part of:
               (i)  A court
proceeding;
               (ii)  A law
enforcement investigation;
               (iii)  A forensic
interview in a criminal or Department of Child Protection Services
investigation;
               (iv)  The security
or surveillance of buildings or grounds; or
               (v)  A photo
identification card;
          (j)  To be notified
promptly if an employee of this state, any political subdivision of this state,
any other governmental entity or any other institution suspects that abuse, neglect
or any criminal offense has been committed against the child;
          (k)  To opt the child
out of any personal analysis, evaluation, survey or data collection by a school
district that would capture data for inclusion in the state longitudinal student
data system except what is necessary and essential to establish a student's
educational record;
          (l)  The right to have
the child excused from school attendance for religious purposes; and
          (m)  The right to
participate in parent-teacher associations and school organizations that are
sanctioned by the board of education of a school district.
     (2)  This section does not
authorize or allow a parent to abuse or neglect a child as defined in Section 43-21-105.
 This section does not apply to a parental action or decision that would end
life.  This section does not prohibit a court from issuing an order that is
otherwise permitted by law.
     (3)  No employee of this
state, any political subdivision of this state, or any other governmental
entity, except for law enforcement personnel, shall encourage or coerce a child
to withhold information from the child's parent.  Nor shall any such employee
withhold from a child's parent information that is relevant to the physical,
emotional or mental health of the child.
     SECTION 5.  Educational
Involvement.
     (1)  The board of education
of a school district, in consultation with parents, teachers and
administrators, shall develop and adopt a policy to promote the involvement of
parents of children enrolled in the schools within the school district,
including:
          (a)  A plan for parent
participation in the schools which is designed to improve parent and teacher
cooperation in such areas as homework, attendance and discipline;
          (b)  Procedures by
which a parent may learn about the course of study for that parent's child and
review all curriculum. These procedures shall allow a parent to:
               (i)  Review a
syllabus for each class or course that the parent's child is enrolled in at
least seven (7) days before the start of each class or course.  The syllabus
shall include a written description of all topics and subjects taught in a
class or course, and shall include a list of all curriculum used in the class
or course, the identity of all individuals providing in-person or live remote
instruction in the class or course, and a description of any assemblies, guest
lectures, field trips or other educational activities that are part of the
class or course;
               (ii)  Review all
curriculum for each class or course offered by the school and any teacher
training materials at least three (3) days before the curriculum or materials
being taught or used for instruction is presented to students;
               (iii)  Copy and
record information from the curriculum and teacher training materials; and
               (iv)  Meet with
the teacher of the class or course, the principal, or other representative from
the school to discuss the curriculum and teaching training materials.
          (c)  Procedures to
notify a parent at least three (3) days in advance and obtain the parent's written
consent before the parent's child attends any instruction or presentation that
has the goal or purpose of studying, exploring or informing students about
gender roles or stereotypes, gender identity, gender expression, sexual
orientation or romantic or sexual relationships;
          (d)  Procedures by
which a parent who objects to any specific instruction or presentation on the
basis that it is harmful may withdraw that parent's child from the instruction
or presentation.  Objection to a specific instruction or presentation on the
basis that it is harmful includes, but is not limited to, objection to a
material or activity because it questions beliefs or practices regarding sex,
morality or religion;
          (e)  Procedures by
which a parent may learn about the nature and purpose of clubs and
extracurricular activities that have been approved by the school and may
withdraw that parent's child from any club or extracurricular to which the
parent objects;
          (f)  Procedures by
which a parent must provide written consent before their child uses a name or
nickname other than their legal name, or before a child uses a pronoun that
does not align with the child's sex.  However, even if a parent provides
written consent, no person shall be compelled to use pronouns that do not align
with the child's sex; and
          (g)  Procedures by
which a parent may learn about parental rights and responsibilities under the
laws of this state.
     (2)  The board of education
of a school district may adopt a policy to provide to parents the information
required by this section in an electronic form.
     (3)  A parent shall submit a
written or electronic request for information pursuant to this section to
either the school principal or the superintendent of the school district.  Within
ten (10) days of receiving the request for information, the school principal or
the superintendent shall either deliver the requested information to the parent
or submit to the parent a written explanation of the reasons for the denial of
the requested information.  If the request for information is denied or the
parent does not receive the requested information within fifteen (15) days
after submitting the request for information, the parent may submit a written
request for the information to the board of education of the school district,
which shall formally consider the request at the next scheduled public meeting
of the board if the request can be properly noticed on the agenda.  If the
request cannot be properly noticed on the agenda, the board of education shall
formally consider the request at the next subsequent public meeting of the
board.
     SECTION 6.  Medical
and Mental Health Care.
     (1)  Except as otherwise
provided by law or court order, a person, corporation, association,
organization, state-supported institution or individual employed by any of
these entities must obtain the consent of a parent of a child before taking any
of the following actions:
          (a)  Procuring,
soliciting to perform, arranging for the performance of, providing a referral
for, or performing surgical procedures upon a child;
          (b)  Procuring,
soliciting to perform, arranging for the performance of, providing a referral
for, or performing a physical examination upon a child;
          (c)  Prescribing or
dispensing any medication or prescription drugs to a child; or
          (d)  Procuring,
soliciting to perform, arranging for the performance of, providing a referral
for, or performing a mental health evaluation in a clinical or nonclinical setting,
or mental health treatment on a child.
     (2)  If the parental consent
pursuant to subsection (1) is given through telemedicine, the person or entity
obtaining parental consent must verify the identity of the parent at the site
where the consent is given.
     (3)  The provisions of this
section shall not apply when it has been determined by a physician that:
          (a)  An emergency
exists; and
          (b)  Either of the
following conditions is true:
               (i)  It is
necessary to perform an activity listed in subsection (1) in order to prevent
death or imminent irreparable physical injury to the child; or
               (ii)  A parent of
the child cannot be located or contacted after a reasonably diligent effort.
     (4)  The provisions of this
section do not apply to an abortion, which shall be governed by Chapter 41, Title
41, Mississippi Code of 1972.
     SECTION 7.  Cause
of Action.
     (1)  A parent may bring suit
for any violation of this act and may raise the act as a defense in any
judicial or administrative proceeding without regard to whether the proceeding
is brought by or in the name of the state government, any private person or any
other party.
     (2)  Notwithstanding any
other provision of law, an action under this act may be commenced, and relief
may be granted, without regard to whether the person commencing the action has
sought or exhausted available administrative remedies.
     (3)  Any person who
successfully asserts a claim or defense under this act may recover declaratory
relief, injunctive relief, compensatory damages, reasonable attorneys' fees and
costs, and any other appropriate relief.
     (4)  Sovereign, governmental
and qualified immunities to suit and from liability are waived and abolished to
the extent of liability created by this act.
     SECTION 8.  Rules
of Construction.
     (1)  Unless those rights
have been legally waived or legally terminated, parents have inalienable rights
that are more comprehensive than those listed in this section.  The protections
of the fundamental right of parents to direct the upbringing, education, health
care and mental health of their child afforded by this act are in addition to
the protections provided under federal law, state law, and the state and federal
constitutions.
     (2)  This act shall be
construed in favor of a broad protection of the fundamental right of parents to
direct the upbringing, education, health care and mental health of their child.
     (3)  Nothing in this act
shall be construed to authorize any government to burden the fundamental right
of parents to direct the upbringing, education, health care and mental health
of their child.
     (4)  If a child has no
affirmative right of access to a particular medical or mental health procedure
or service, then nothing in this act shall be construed to grant that child's
parent an affirmative right of access to that procedure or service on that child's
behalf.
     (5)  State statutory law
adopted after the date of the enactment of this act is subject to this act
unless such law explicitly excludes such application by reference to this act.
     SECTION 9.  Section
37-3-49, Mississippi Code of 1972, is amended as follows:
     37-3-49.  (1)  The State
Department of Education shall provide an instructional program and establish
guidelines and procedures for managing such program in the public schools
within the school districts throughout the state as part of the State Program of
Educational Accountability and Assessment of Performance as prescribed in
Section 37-3-46.  Public school districts may (a) elect to adopt the
instructional program and management system provided by the State Department of
Education, or (b) elect to adopt an instructional program and management system
which meets or exceeds criteria established by the State Department of
Education for such.  This provision shall begin with the courses taught in
Grades K-8 which contain skills tested through the Mississippi Basic Skills
Assessment Program and shall proceed through all secondary school courses
mandated for graduation and all secondary school courses in the Mississippi end-of-course
testing program.  Other state core objectives must be included in the district's
instructional program as they are provided by the State Department of Education
along with instructional practices, resources, evaluation items and management
procedures.  Districts are encouraged to adapt this program and accompanying
procedures to all other instructional areas.  The department shall provide that
such program and guidelines, or a program and guidelines developed by a local
school district which incorporates the core objectives from the curriculum
structure are enforced through the performance-based accreditation system.  It
is the intent of the Legislature that every effort be made to protect the
instructional time in the classroom and reduce the amount of paperwork which
must be completed by teachers.  The State Department of Education shall take
steps to insure that school districts properly use staff development time to
work on the districts' instructional management plans.
     (2)  The State Department of
Education shall provide such instructional program and management guidelines
which shall require for every public school district that:
          (a)  All courses taught
in Grades K-8 which contain skills which are tested through the Mississippi
Basic Skills Assessment Program, all secondary school courses mandated for
graduation, and all courses in the end-of-course testing program shall include
the State Department of Education's written list of learning objectives.
          (b)  The local school
board must adopt the objectives that will form the core curriculum which will
be systematically delivered throughout the district.
          (c)  The set of
objectives provided by the State Department of Education must be accompanied by
suggested instructional practices and resources that would help teachers
organize instruction so as to promote student learning of the objectives. 
Objectives added by the school district must also be accompanied by suggested
instructional practices and resources that would help teachers organize
instruction.  The instructional practices and resources that are identified are
to be used as suggestions and not as requirements that teachers must follow. 
The goal of the program is to have students to achieve the desired objective
and not to limit teachers in the way they teach.
          (d)  Standards for
student performance must be established for each core objective in the local
program and those standards establish the district's definition of mastery for
each objective.
          (e)  There shall be an
annual review of student performance in the instructional program against
locally established standards.  When weaknesses exist in the local
instructional program, the district shall take action to improve student
performance.
     (3)  The parent of each
public school student has the right to receive effective communication from the
school principal as to the manner in which instructional materials are used to
implement the school's curricular objectives, in accordance with the provisions
of Section 5 of this act.
     ( * * *34)  The State Board of Education and
the board of trustees of each school district shall adopt policies to limit and
reduce the number and length of written reports that classroom teachers are
required to prepare.
     ( * * *45)  This section shall not be construed
to limit teachers from using their own professional skills to help students
master instructional objectives, nor shall it be construed as a call for more
detailed or complex lesson plans or any increase in testing at the local school
district level.
     ( * * *56)  Districts meeting the highest
levels of accreditation standards, as defined by the State Board of Education,
shall be exempted from the provisions of subsection (2) of this section.  
     SECTION 10.  Section
37-13-173, Mississippi Code of 1972, is amended as follows:
     37-13-173.  (1)  Each
school providing instruction or any other presentation on human sexuality in the
classroom, assembly or other official setting shall be required to provide no less
than * * *one (1) week's
three (3) days' written notice thereof to the parents of children in such
programs of instruction.  The written notice must inform the parents of their right
to request the inclusion of their child for such instruction or presentation.  The
notice also must inform the parents of the right, and the appropriate process, to
review the curriculum and all materials to be used in the lesson or presentation.
     (2)  Upon the written
request of any parent or legal guardian to the school principal to exempt his
or her child from the teaching of reproductive health or any disease, including
HIV/AIDS, in accordance with the provisions of Section 37-13-171, the school
shall excuse the parent's child from such instruction or presentation, without detriment
to the student.
     SECTION 11.  Section
37-15-3, Mississippi Code of 1972, is amended as follows:
     37-15-3.  (1) * * *Such The cumulative folders as are
provided for in Section 37-15-1 shall be kept in the school wherein the pupils
are in attendance.  Both the permanent records and the cumulative folders shall
be available to school officials, including teachers within the school district
who have been determined by the school district to have legitimate educational
interests.  In no case, however, shall such records be available to the general
public.
     (2)  The rights of
students and their parents or legal guardians with respect to education records
created, maintained, or used by public educational institutions and agencies
shall be protected.  Transcripts of courses and grades may be furnished
when requested by the parent or guardian or eligible pupil as prescribed in the
Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act of 1974, as amended, 20 USCS Section
1232g, the implementing regulations issued pursuant thereto, and this section,
provided the following:
          (a)  Students
and their parents shall have the right to access their education records, including
the right to inspect and review those records;
          (b)  Students
and their parents shall have the right to waive their access to their education
records in certain circumstances;
          (c)  Students
and their parents shall have the right to challenge the content of education
records in order to ensure that the records are not inaccurate, misleading or
otherwise a violation of privacy or other rights;
          (d)  Students
and their parents shall have the right of privacy with respect to such records
and reports; and
          (e)  Students
and their parents shall receive annual notice of their rights with respect to
education records.
     (3)  * * *Such The records shall be kept for each
pupil throughout his entire public school enrollment period.  In the event a
pupil transfers to a public school, including a charter school, then the
cumulative folder shall be furnished to the head of the school to which the
pupil transfers; if a pupil transfers to a private school, then a copy of the
cumulative folder shall be furnished to the head of the school to which the
pupil transfers.  The permanent record shall be kept permanently by the school
district from which the pupil transferred.
     (4)  At no time may a
permanent record of a student be destroyed, but cumulative folders may be
destroyed by order of the school board of the school district in not less than
five (5) years after the permanent record of the pupil has become inactive and
has been transferred to the central depository of the district.  * * *Provided, However, * * *that where a school district makes complete
copies of inactive permanent records on photographic film, microfilm * * *, or any other acceptable form of medium for
storage which may be reproduced as needed, * * *such those permanent records may be
destroyed after the photographic film or microfilm copy has been stored in the
central depository of the district.
     SECTION 12.  Section
37-7-301, Mississippi Code of 1972, is brought forward as follows:
     37-7-301.  The school boards
of all school districts shall have the following powers, authority and duties
in addition to all others imposed or granted by law, to wit:
          (a)  To organize and
operate the schools of the district and to make such division between the high
school grades and elementary grades as, in their judgment, will serve the best
interests of the school;
          (b)  To introduce
public school music, art, manual training and other special subjects into
either the elementary or high school grades, as the board shall deem proper;
          (c)  To be the
custodians of real and personal school property and to manage, control and care
for same, both during the school term and during vacation;
          (d)  To have
responsibility for the erection, repairing and equipping of school facilities
and the making of necessary school improvements;
          (e)  To suspend or to
expel a pupil or to change the placement of a pupil to the school district's
alternative school or homebound program for misconduct in the school or on school
property, as defined in Section 37-11-29, on the road to and from school, or at
any school-related activity or event, or for conduct occurring on property
other than school property or other than at a school-related activity or event
when such conduct by a pupil, in the determination of the school superintendent
or principal, renders that pupil's presence in the classroom a disruption to
the educational environment of the school or a detriment to the best interest
and welfare of the pupils and teacher of such class as a whole, and to delegate
such authority to the appropriate officials of the school district;
          (f)  To visit schools
in the district, in their discretion, in a body for the purpose of determining
what can be done for the improvement of the school in a general way;
          (g)  To support, within
reasonable limits, the superintendent, principal and teachers where necessary
for the proper discipline of the school;
          (h)  To exclude from
the schools students with what appears to be infectious or contagious diseases;
provided, however, such student may be allowed to return to school upon presenting
a certificate from a public health officer, duly licensed physician or nurse
practitioner that the student is free from such disease;
          (i)  To require those
vaccinations specified by the State Health Officer as provided in Section 41-23-37;
          (j)  To see that all
necessary utilities and services are provided in the schools at all times when
same are needed;
          (k)  To authorize the
use of the school buildings and grounds for the holding of public meetings and
gatherings of the people under such regulations as may be prescribed by said
board;
          (l)  To prescribe and
enforce rules and regulations not inconsistent with law or with the regulations
of the State Board of Education for their own government and for the government
of the schools, and to transact their business at regular and special meetings
called and held in the manner provided by law;
          (m)  To maintain and
operate all of the schools under their control for such length of time during
the year as may be required;
          (n)  To enforce in the
schools the courses of study and the use of the textbooks prescribed by the proper
authorities;
          (o)  To make orders
directed to the superintendent of schools for the issuance of pay certificates for
lawful purposes on any available funds of the district and to have full control
of the receipt, distribution, allotment and disbursement of all funds provided
for the support and operation of the schools of such school district whether
such funds be derived from state appropriations, local ad valorem tax collections,
or otherwise.  The local school board shall be authorized and empowered to
promulgate rules and regulations that specify the types of claims and set
limits of the dollar amount for payment of claims by the superintendent of
schools to be ratified by the board at the next regularly scheduled meeting
after payment has been made;
          (p)  To select all
school district personnel in the manner provided by law, and to provide for
such employee fringe benefit programs, including accident reimbursement plans, as
may be deemed necessary and appropriate by the board;
          (q)  To provide athletic
programs and other school activities and to regulate the establishment and
operation of such programs and activities;
          (r)  To join, in their
discretion, any association of school boards and other public school-related
organizations, and to pay from local funds other than minimum foundation funds,
any membership dues;
          (s)  To expend local
school activity funds, or other available school district funds, other than
minimum education program funds, for the purposes prescribed under this paragraph. 
"Activity funds" shall mean all funds received by school officials in
all school districts paid or collected to participate in any school activity,
such activity being part of the school program and partially financed with
public funds or supplemented by public funds.  The term "activity funds"
shall not include any funds raised and/or expended by any organization unless
commingled in a bank account with existing activity funds, regardless of
whether the funds were raised by school employees or received by school
employees during school hours or using school facilities, and regardless of
whether a school employee exercises influence over the expenditure or
disposition of such funds.  Organizations shall not be required to make any
payment to any school for the use of any school facility if, in the discretion
of the local school governing board, the organization's function shall be deemed
to be beneficial to the official or extracurricular programs of the school. 
For the purposes of this provision, the term "organization" shall not
include any organization subject to the control of the local school governing
board.  Activity funds may only be expended for any necessary expenses or travel
costs, including advances, incurred by students and their chaperons in attending
any in-state or out-of-state school-related programs, conventions or seminars
and/or any commodities, equipment, travel expenses, purchased services or
school supplies which the local school governing board, in its discretion,
shall deem beneficial to the official or extracurricular programs of the
district, including items which may subsequently become the personal property
of individuals, including yearbooks, athletic apparel, book covers and
trophies.  Activity funds may be used to pay travel expenses of school district
personnel.  The local school governing board shall be authorized and empowered
to promulgate rules and regulations specifically designating for what purposes
school activity funds may be expended.  The local school governing board shall
provide (i) that such school activity funds shall be maintained and expended by
the principal of the school generating the funds in individual bank accounts,
or (ii) that such school activity funds shall be maintained and expended by the
superintendent of schools in a central depository approved by the board.  The
local school governing board shall provide that such school activity funds be
audited as part of the annual audit required in Section 37-9-18.  The State
Department of Education shall prescribe a uniform system of accounting and
financial reporting for all school activity fund transactions;
          (t)  To enter into an
energy performance contract, energy services contract, on a shared-savings,
lease or lease-purchase basis, for energy efficiency services and/or equipment
as provided for in Section 31-7-14;
          (u)  To maintain
accounts and issue pay certificates on school food service bank accounts;
          (v)  (i)  To lease a
school building from an individual, partnership, nonprofit corporation or a
private for-profit corporation for the use of such school district, and to
expend funds therefor as may be available from any nonminimum program sources. 
The school board of the school district desiring to lease a school building
shall declare by resolution that a need exists for a school building and that
the school district cannot provide the necessary funds to pay the cost or its proportionate
share of the cost of a school building required to meet the present needs.  The
resolution so adopted by the school board shall be published once each week for
three (3) consecutive weeks in a newspaper having a general circulation in the
school district involved, with the first publication thereof to be made not
less than thirty (30) days prior to the date upon which the school board is to
act on the question of leasing a school building.  If no petition requesting an
election is filed prior to such meeting as hereinafter provided, then the school
board may, by resolution spread upon its minutes, proceed to lease a school
building.  If at any time prior to said meeting a petition signed by not less
than twenty percent (20%) or fifteen hundred (1500), whichever is less, of the
qualified electors of the school district involved shall be filed with the
school board requesting that an election be called on the question, then the
school board shall, not later than the next regular meeting, adopt a resolution
calling an election to be held within such school district upon the question of
authorizing the school board to lease a school building.  Such election shall
be called and held, and notice thereof shall be given, in the same manner for
elections upon the questions of the issuance of the bonds of school districts,
and the results thereof shall be certified to the school board.  If at least
three-fifths (3/5) of the qualified electors of the school district who voted
in such election shall vote in favor of the leasing of a school building, then
the school board shall proceed to lease a school building.  The term of the
lease contract shall not exceed twenty (20) years, and the total cost of such
lease shall be either the amount of the lowest and best bid accepted by the
school board after advertisement for bids or an amount not to exceed the
current fair market value of the lease as determined by the averaging of at
least two (2) appraisals by certified general appraisers licensed by the State
of Mississippi.  The term "school building" as used in this paragraph
(v)(i) shall be construed to mean any building or buildings used for classroom
purposes in connection with the operation of schools and shall include the site
therefor, necessary support facilities, and the equipment thereof and
appurtenances thereto such as heating facilities, water supply, sewage
disposal, landscaping, walks, drives and playgrounds.  The term "lease"
as used in this paragraph (v)(i) may include a lease-purchase contract;
              (ii)  If two (2) or
more school districts propose to enter into a lease contract jointly, then
joint meetings of the school boards having control may be held but no action
taken shall be binding on any such school district unless the question of leasing
a school building is approved in each participating school district under the
procedure hereinabove set forth in paragraph (v)(i).  All of the provisions of
paragraph (v)(i) regarding the term and amount of the lease contract shall
apply to the school boards of school districts acting jointly.  Any lease contract
executed by two (2) or more school districts as joint lessees shall set out the
amount of the aggregate lease rental to be paid by each, which may be agreed
upon, but there shall be no right of occupancy by any lessee unless the
aggregate rental is paid as stipulated in the lease contract.  All rights of
joint lessees under the lease contract shall be in proportion to the amount of
lease rental paid by each;
          (w)  To employ all
noninstructional and noncertificated employees and fix the duties and compensation
of such personnel deemed necessary pursuant to the recommendation of the
superintendent of schools;
          (x)  To employ and fix
the duties and compensation of such legal counsel as deemed necessary;
          (y)  Subject to rules
and regulations of the State Board of Education, to purchase, own and operate
trucks, vans and other motor vehicles, which shall bear the proper
identification required by law;
          (z)  To expend funds
for the payment of substitute teachers and to adopt reasonable regulations for
the employment and compensation of such substitute teachers;
          (aa)  To acquire in its
own name by purchase all real property which shall be necessary and desirable
in connection with the construction, renovation or improvement of any public
school building or structure.  Whenever the purchase price for such real
property is greater than Fifty Thousand Dollars ($50,000.00), the school board
shall not purchase the property for an amount exceeding the fair market value
of such property as determined by the average of at least two (2) independent
appraisals by certified general appraisers licensed by the State of
Mississippi.  If the board shall be unable to agree with the owner of any such
real property in connection with any such project, the board shall have the power
and authority to acquire any such real property by condemnation proceedings
pursuant to Section 11-27-1 et seq., Mississippi Code of 1972, and for such
purpose, the right of eminent domain is hereby conferred upon and vested in
said board.  Provided further, that the local school board is authorized to
grant an easement for ingress and egress over sixteenth section land or lieu
land in exchange for a similar easement upon adjoining land where the exchange
of easements affords substantial benefit to the sixteenth section land;
provided, however, the exchange must be based upon values as determined by a
competent appraiser, with any differential in value to be adjusted by cash
payment.  Any easement rights granted over sixteenth section land under such authority
shall terminate when the easement ceases to be used for its stated purpose.  No
sixteenth section or lieu land which is subject to an existing lease shall be burdened
by any such easement except by consent of the lessee or unless the school district
shall acquire the unexpired leasehold interest affected by the easement;
          (bb)  To charge
reasonable fees related to the educational programs of the district, in the
manner prescribed in Section 37-7-335;
          (cc)  Subject to rules
and regulations of the State Board of Education, to purchase relocatable
classrooms for the use of such school district, in the manner prescribed in
Section 37-1-13;
          (dd)  Enter into contracts
or agreements with other school districts, political subdivisions or
governmental entities to carry out one or more of the powers or duties of the
school board, or to allow more efficient utilization of limited resources for
providing services to the public;
          (ee)  To provide for in-service
training for employees of the district;
          (ff)  As part of their
duties to prescribe the use of textbooks, to provide that parents and legal
guardians shall be responsible for the textbooks and for the compensation to
the school district for any books which are not returned to the proper schools
upon the withdrawal of their dependent child.  If a textbook is lost or not
returned by any student who drops out of the public school district, the parent
or legal guardian shall also compensate the school district for the fair market
value of the textbooks;
          (gg)  To conduct fund-raising
activities on behalf of the school district that the local school board, in its
discretion, deems appropriate or beneficial to the official or extracurricular
programs of the district; provided that:
              (i)  Any proceeds of
the fund-raising activities shall be treated as "activity funds" and
shall be accounted for as are other activity funds under this section; and
              (ii)  Fund-raising
activities conducted or authorized by the board for the sale of school
pictures, the rental of caps and gowns or the sale of graduation invitations
for which the school board receives a commission, rebate or fee shall contain a
disclosure statement advising that a portion of the proceeds of the sales or
rentals shall be contributed to the student activity fund;
          (hh)  To allow
individual lessons for music, art and other curriculum-related activities for
academic credit or nonacademic credit during school hours and using school
equipment and facilities, subject to uniform rules and regulations adopted by
the school board;
          (ii)  To charge
reasonable fees for participating in an extracurricular activity for academic
or nonacademic credit for necessary and required equipment such as safety equipment,
band instruments and uniforms;
          (jj)  To conduct or
participate in any fund-raising activities on behalf of or in connection with a
tax-exempt charitable organization;
          (kk)  To exercise such
powers as may be reasonably necessary to carry out the provisions of this
section;
          (ll)  To expend funds for
the services of nonprofit arts organizations or other such nonprofit organizations
who provide performances or other services for the students of the school
district;
          (mm)  To expend federal
No Child Left Behind Act funds, or any other available funds that are expressly
designated and authorized for that use, to pay training, educational expenses,
salary incentives and salary supplements to employees of local school districts;
except that incentives shall not be considered part of the local supplement as defined
in Section 37-151-5(o), nor shall incentives be considered part of the local
supplement paid to an individual teacher for the purposes of Section 37-19-7(1). 
Mississippi Adequate Education Program funds or any other state funds may not
be used for salary incentives or salary supplements as provided in this paragraph
(mm);
          (nn)  To use any
available funds, not appropriated or designated for any other purpose, for
reimbursement to the state-licensed employees from both in state and out of
state, who enter into a contract for employment in a school district, for the
expense of moving when the employment necessitates the relocation of the
licensed employee to a different geographical area than that in which the
licensed employee resides before entering into the contract.  The reimbursement
shall not exceed One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) for the documented actual
expenses incurred in the course of relocating, including the expense of any
professional moving company or persons employed to assist with the move, rented
moving vehicles or equipment, mileage in the amount authorized for county and
municipal employees under Section 25-3-41 if the licensed employee used his
personal vehicle or vehicles for the move, meals and such other expenses
associated with the relocation.  No licensed employee may be reimbursed for moving
expenses under this section on more than one (1) occasion by the same school
district.  Nothing in this section shall be construed to require the actual
residence to which the licensed employee relocates to be within the boundaries
of the school district that has executed a contract for employment in order for
the licensed employee to be eligible for reimbursement for the moving expenses. 
However, the licensed employee must relocate within the boundaries of the State
of Mississippi.  Any individual receiving relocation assistance through the
Critical Teacher Shortage Act as provided in Section 37-159-5 shall not be
eligible to receive additional relocation funds as authorized in this paragraph;
          (oo)  To use any
available funds, not appropriated or designated for any other purpose, to
reimburse persons who interview for employment as a licensed employee with the
district for the mileage and other actual expenses incurred in the course of travel
to and from the interview at the rate authorized for county and municipal
employees under Section 25-3-41;
          (pp)  Consistent with
the report of the Task Force to Conduct a Best Financial Management Practices
Review, to improve school district management and use of resources and identify
cost savings as established in Section 8 of Chapter 610, Laws of 2002, local
school boards are encouraged to conduct independent reviews of the management and
efficiency of schools and school districts.  Such management and efficiency
reviews shall provide state and local officials and the public with the
following:
              (i)  An assessment
of a school district's governance and organizational structure;
              (ii)  An assessment
of the school district's financial and personnel management; 
              (iii)  An
assessment of revenue levels and sources;
              (iv)  An assessment
of facilities utilization, planning and maintenance;
              (v)  An assessment
of food services, transportation and safety/security systems;
              (vi)  An assessment
of instructional and administrative technology;
              (vii)  A review of
the instructional management and the efficiency and effectiveness of existing
instructional programs; and
              (viii)  Recommended
methods for increasing efficiency and effectiveness in providing educational
services to the public; 
          (qq)  To enter into agreements
with other local school boards for the establishment of an educational service
agency (ESA) to provide for the cooperative needs of the region in which the
school district is located, as provided in Section 37-7-345;  
          (rr)  To implement a
financial literacy program for students in Grades 10 and 11.  The board may
review the national programs and obtain free literature from various nationally
recognized programs.  After review of the different programs, the board may
certify a program that is most appropriate for the school districts' needs.  If
a district implements a financial literacy program, then any student in Grade
10 or 11 may participate in the program.  The financial literacy program shall
include, but is not limited to, instruction in the same areas of personal
business and finance as required under Section 37-1-3(2)(b).  The school board
may coordinate with volunteer teachers from local community organizations, including,
but not limited to, the following:  United States Department of Agriculture
Rural Development, United States Department of Housing and Urban Development,
Junior Achievement, bankers and other nonprofit organizations.  Nothing in this
paragraph shall be construed as to require school boards to implement a
financial literacy program;
          (ss)  To collaborate
with the State Board of Education, Community Action Agencies or the Department
of Human Services to develop and implement a voluntary program to provide
services for a prekindergarten program that addresses the cognitive, social, and
emotional needs of four-year-old and three-year-old children.  The school board
may utilize any source of available revenue to fund the voluntary program.  Effective with the 2013-2014 school year, to
implement voluntary prekindergarten programs under the Early Learning
Collaborative Act of 2013 pursuant to state funds awarded by the State
Department of Education on a matching basis;
          (tt)  With respect to any lawful, written obligation of a school
district, including, but not limited to, leases (excluding leases of sixteenth
section public school trust land), bonds, notes, or other agreement, to agree
in writing with the obligee that the Department of Revenue or any state agency, department or commission created
under state law may:
              (i)  Withhold all or any part (as agreed by the school
board) of any monies which such local school board is entitled to receive from time
to time under any law and which is in the possession of the Department
of Revenue, or any state agency, department or
commission created under state law; and
              (ii)  Pay the same over to any financial institution,
trustee or other obligee, as directed in writing by the school board, to
satisfy all or part of such obligation of the school district.
     The school board may make such written agreement to
withhold and transfer funds irrevocable for the term of the written obligation
and may include in the written agreement any other terms and provisions
acceptable to the school board.  If the school board files a copy of such written
agreement with the Department of Revenue,
or any state agency, department or commission created under state law then the Department
of Revenue or any state agency, department or
commission created under state law shall immediately make the withholdings
provided in such agreement from the amounts due the local school board and
shall continue to pay the same over to such financial institution, trustee or
obligee for the term of the agreement.
     This paragraph (tt) shall not grant any extra
authority to a school board to issue debt in any amount exceeding statutory
limitations on assessed value of taxable property within such school district or
the statutory limitations on debt maturities, and shall not grant any extra
authority to impose, levy or collect a tax which is not otherwise expressly
provided for, and shall not be construed to apply to sixteenth section public
school trust land;
          (uu)  With respect to any matter or transaction that is
competitively bid by a school district, to accept from any bidder as a good-faith
deposit or bid bond or bid surety, the same type of good-faith deposit or bid
bond or bid surety that may be accepted by the state or any other political
subdivision on similar competitively bid matters or transactions.  This
paragraph (uu) shall not be construed to apply to sixteenth section public
school trust land.  The school board may authorize the investment of any school
district funds in the same kind and manner of investments, including pooled
investments, as any other political subdivision, including community hospitals;
          (vv)  To utilize the alternate method for the conveyance or exchange of
unused school buildings and/or land, reserving a partial or other undivided
interest in the property, as specifically authorized and provided in Section 37-7-485;
          (ww) 
To delegate, privatize or otherwise enter into a contract with private entities
for the operation of any and all functions of nonacademic school process, procedures
and operations including, but not limited to, cafeteria workers, janitorial
services, transportation, professional development, achievement and
instructional consulting services materials and products, purchasing
cooperatives, insurance, business manager services, auditing and accounting
services, school safety/risk prevention, data processing and student records,
and other staff services; however, the authority under this paragraph does not
apply to the leasing, management or operation of sixteenth section lands. 
Local school districts, working through their regional education service
agency, are encouraged to enter into buying consortia with other member districts
for the purposes of more efficient use of state resources as described in
Section 37-7-345;
          (xx)  To partner with entities,
organizations and corporations for the purpose of benefiting the school
district;
          (yy) 
To borrow funds from the Rural Economic Development Authority for the maintenance
of school buildings;
          (zz) 
To fund and operate voluntary early childhood education programs, defined as
programs for children less than five (5) years of age on or before September 1,
and to use any source of revenue for such early childhood education programs. 
Such programs shall not conflict with the Early Learning Collaborative Act of
2013;
          (aaa) 
To issue and provide for the use of procurement cards by school board members,
superintendents and licensed school personnel consistent with the rules and
regulations of the Mississippi Department of Finance and Administration under
Section 31-7-9; and
          (bbb)  To conduct an annual comprehensive evaluation of the
superintendent of schools consistent with the assessment components of paragraph
(pp) of this section and the assessment benchmarks established by the
Mississippi School Board Association to evaluate the success the superintendent
has attained in meeting district goals and objectives, the superintendent's leadership skill and whether
or not the superintendent has established appropriate standards for
performance, is monitoring success and is using data for improvement.
     SECTION 13.  Section
37-13-171, Mississippi Code of 1972, is brought forward as follows:
     37-13-171.  (1)  The local school
board of every public school district shall adopt a policy to implement abstinence-only
or abstinence-plus education into its curriculum by June 30, 2012, which instruction
in those subjects shall be implemented not later than the start of the 2012-2013
school year or the local school board shall adopt the program which has been developed
by the Mississippi Department of Human Services and the Mississippi Department of
Health.  The State Department of Education shall approve each district's curriculum
for sex-related education and shall establish a protocol to be used by districts
to provide continuity in teaching the approved curriculum in a manner that is age,
grade and developmentally appropriate.
     (2)  Abstinence-only education
shall remain the state standard for any sex-related education taught in the public
schools.  For purposes of this section, abstinence-only education includes any type
of instruction or program which, at an appropriate age and grade:
          (a)  Teaches the social,
psychological and health gains to be realized by abstaining from sexual activity,
and the likely negative psychological and physical effects of not abstaining;
          (b)  Teaches the harmful
consequences to the child, the child's parents and society that bearing children
out of wedlock is likely to produce, including the health, educational, financial
and other difficulties the child and his or her parents are likely to face, as well
as the inappropriateness of the social and economic burden placed on others;
          (c)  Teaches that unwanted
sexual advances are irresponsible and teaches how to reject sexual advances and
how alcohol and drug use increases vulnerability to sexual advances;
          (d)  Teaches that abstinence
from sexual activity before marriage, and fidelity within marriage, is the only
certain way to avoid out-of-wedlock pregnancy, sexually transmitted diseases and
related health problems.  The instruction or program may include a discussion on
condoms or contraceptives, but only if that discussion includes a factual presentation
of the risks and failure rates of those contraceptives.  In no case shall the instruction
or program include any demonstration of how condoms or other contraceptives are
applied;
          (e)  Teaches the current
state law related to sexual conduct, including forcible rape, statutory rape, paternity
establishment, child support and homosexual activity; and
          (f)  Teaches that a mutually
faithful, monogamous relationship in the context of marriage is the only appropriate
setting for sexual intercourse.
     (3)  A program or instruction
on sex-related education need not include every component listed in subsection (2)
of this section for abstinence-only education.  However, no program or instruction
under an abstinence-only curriculum may include anything that contradicts the excluded
components.  For purposes of this section, abstinence-plus education includes every
component listed under subsection (2) of this section that is age and grade appropriate,
in addition to any other programmatic or instructional component approved by the
department, which shall not include instruction and demonstrations on the application
and use of condoms.  Abstinence-plus education may discuss other contraceptives,
the nature, causes and effects of sexually transmitted diseases, or the prevention
of sexually transmitted diseases, including HIV/AIDS, along with a factual presentation
of the risks and failure rates.
     (4)  Any course containing sex-related
education offered in the public schools shall include instruction in either abstinence-only
or abstinence-plus education.
     (5)  Local school districts,
in their discretion, may host programs designed to teach parents how to discuss
abstinence with their children.
     (6)  There shall be no effort
in either an abstinence-only or an abstinence-plus curriculum to teach that abortion
can be used to prevent the birth of a baby.
     (7)  At all times when sex-related
education is discussed or taught, boys and girls shall be separated according to
gender into different classrooms, sex-related education instruction may not be conducted
when boys and girls are in the company of any students of the opposite gender.
     (8)  This section shall stand
repealed on July 1, 2024.
     SECTION 14.  Section
43-21-105, Mississippi Code of 1972, is brought forward as follows:
     43-21-105.  The following
words and phrases, for purposes of this chapter, shall have the meanings
ascribed herein unless the context clearly otherwise requires:
          (a)  "Youth court"
means the Youth Court Division.
          (b)  "Judge"
means the judge of the Youth Court Division.
          (c)  "Designee"
means any person that the judge appoints to perform a duty which this chapter
requires to be done by the judge or his designee.  The judge may not appoint a
person who is involved in law enforcement or who
is an employee of the Mississippi Department of Human Services or the
Mississippi Department of Child Protection Services to be his designee.
          (d)  "Child"
and "youth" are synonymous, and each means a person who has not
reached his eighteenth birthday.  A child who has not reached his eighteenth
birthday and is on active duty for a branch of the armed services or is married
is not considered a "child" or "youth" for the purposes of
this chapter.
          (e)  "Parent"
means the father or mother to whom the child has been born, or the father or
mother by whom the child has been legally adopted.
          (f)  "Guardian"
means a court-appointed guardian of the person of a child.
          (g)  "Custodian"
means any person having the present care or custody of a child whether such
person be a parent or otherwise.
          (h)  "Legal
custodian" means a court-appointed custodian of the child.
          (i)  "Delinquent
child" means a child who has reached his tenth birthday and who has
committed a delinquent act.
          (j)  "Delinquent
act" is any act, which if committed by an adult, is designated as a crime
under state or federal law, or municipal or county ordinance other than
offenses punishable by life imprisonment or death.  A delinquent act includes
escape from lawful detention and violations of the Uniform Controlled
Substances Law and violent behavior.
          (k)  "Child in
need of supervision" means a child who has reached his seventh birthday
and is in need of treatment or rehabilitation because the child:
              (i)  Is habitually
disobedient of reasonable and lawful commands of his parent, guardian or custodian
and is ungovernable; or
              (ii)  While being
required to attend school, willfully and habitually violates the rules thereof
or willfully and habitually absents himself therefrom; or
              (iii)  Runs away from
home without good cause; or
              (iv)  Has committed
a delinquent act or acts.
          (l)  "Neglected
child" means a child:
              (i)  Whose parent,
guardian or custodian or any person responsible for his care or support,
neglects or refuses, when able so to do, to provide for him proper and
necessary care or support, or education as required by law, or medical,
surgical, or other care necessary for his well-being; however, a parent who
withholds medical treatment from any child who in good faith is under treatment
by spiritual means alone through prayer in accordance with the tenets and
practices of a recognized church or religious denomination by a duly accredited
practitioner thereof shall not, for that reason alone, be considered to be
neglectful under any provision of this chapter; or
              (ii)  Who is otherwise
without proper care, custody, supervision or support; or
              (iii)  Who, for any
reason, lacks the special care made necessary for him by reason of his mental
condition, whether the mental condition is having mental illness or having an
intellectual disability; or
              (iv)  Who, for any
reason, lacks the care necessary for his health, morals or well-being.
          (m)  "Abused child"
means a child whose parent, guardian or custodian or any person responsible for
his care or support, whether legally obligated to do so or not, has caused or
allowed to be caused, upon the child, sexual abuse, sexual exploitation,
commercial sexual exploitation, emotional abuse, mental injury, nonaccidental
physical injury or other maltreatment.  However, physical discipline, including
spanking, performed on a child by a parent, guardian or custodian in a reasonable
manner shall not be deemed abuse under this section.  "Abused child" also means a child who is or has been trafficked
within the meaning of the Mississippi Human Trafficking Act by any person,
without regard to the relationship of the person to the child.
          (n)  "Sexual abuse"
means obscene or pornographic photographing, filming or depiction of children
for commercial purposes, or the rape, molestation, incest, prostitution or
other such forms of sexual exploitation of children under circumstances which
indicate that the child's health or welfare is harmed or threatened.
          (o)  "A child in
need of special care" means a child with any mental or physical illness
that cannot be treated with the dispositional alternatives ordinarily available
to the youth court.
          (p)  A "dependent
child" means any child who is not a child in need of supervision, a
delinquent child, an abused child or a neglected child, and which child has been
voluntarily placed in the custody of the Department of Child Protection
Services by his parent, guardian or custodian.
          (q)  "Custody"
means the physical possession of the child by any person.
          (r)  "Legal custody"
means the legal status created by a court order which gives the legal custodian
the responsibilities of physical possession of the child and the duty to
provide him with food, shelter, education and reasonable medical care, all
subject to residual rights and responsibilities of the parent or guardian of
the person.
          (s)  "Detention"
means the care of children in physically restrictive facilities.
          (t)  "Shelter"
means care of children in physically nonrestrictive facilities.
          (u)  "Records involving
children" means any of the following from which the child can be
identified:
              (i)  All youth
court records as defined in Section 43-21-251;
              (ii)  All forensic
interviews conducted by a child advocacy center in abuse and neglect investigations;
              (iii)  All law
enforcement records as defined in Section 43-21-255;
              (iv)  All agency
records as defined in Section 43-21-257; and
              (v)  All other
documents maintained by any representative of the state, county, municipality
or other public agency insofar as they relate to the apprehension, custody, adjudication
or disposition of a child who is the subject of a youth court cause.
          (v)  "Any person
responsible for care or support" means the person who is providing for the
child at a given time.  This term shall include, but is not limited to, stepparents,
foster parents, relatives, nonlicensed babysitters or other similar persons
responsible for a child and staff of residential care facilities and group
homes that are licensed by the Department of Human Services or the Department
of Child Protection Services.
          (w)  The singular
includes the plural, the plural the singular and the masculine the feminine
when consistent with the intent of this chapter.
          (x)  "Out-of-home"
setting means the temporary supervision or care of children by the staff of licensed
day care centers, the staff of public, private and state schools, the staff of
juvenile detention facilities, the staff of unlicensed residential care
facilities and group homes and the staff of, or individuals representing,
churches, civic or social organizations.
          (y)  "Durable
legal custody" means the legal status created by a court order which gives
the durable legal custodian the responsibilities of physical possession of the
child and the duty to provide him with care, nurture, welfare, food, shelter,
education and reasonable medical care.  All these duties as enumerated are
subject to the residual rights and responsibilities of the natural parent(s) or
guardian(s) of the child or children.
          (z)  "Status
offense" means conduct subject to adjudication by the youth court that
would not be a crime if committed by an adult.
          (aa)  "Financially
able" means a parent or child who is ineligible for a court-appointed
attorney.
          (bb)  "Assessment"
means an individualized examination of a child to determine the child's
psychosocial needs and problems, including the type and extent of any mental
health, substance abuse or co-occurring mental health and substance abuse
disorders and recommendations for treatment.  The term includes, but is not
limited to, a drug and alcohol, psychological or psychiatric evaluation,
records review, clinical interview or the administration of a formal test and
instrument.
          (cc)  "Screening"
means a process, with or without the administration of a formal instrument,
that is designed to identify a child who is at increased risk of having mental
health, substance abuse or co-occurring mental health and substance abuse
disorders that warrant immediate attention, intervention or more comprehensive
assessment.
          (dd)  "Durable legal
relative guardianship" means the legal status created by a youth court
order that conveys the physical and legal custody of a child or children by
durable legal guardianship to a relative or fictive kin who is licensed as a
foster or resource parent.
          (ee)  "Relative"
means a person related to the child by affinity or consanguinity within the
third degree.
          (ff)  "Fictive kin"
means a person not related to the child legally or biologically but who is considered
a relative due to a significant, familial-like and ongoing relationship with
the child and family.
          (gg)  "Reasonable
efforts" means the exercise of reasonable care and due diligence by the
Department of Human Services, the Department of Child Protection Services, or
any other appropriate entity or person to use appropriate and available
services to prevent the unnecessary removal of the child from the home or
provide other services related to meeting the needs of the child and the
parents.
          (hh)  "Commercial
sexual exploitation" means any sexual act or crime of a sexual nature,
which is committed against a child for financial or economic gain, to obtain a
thing of value for quid pro quo exchange of property or for any other purpose.
     SECTION 15.  This act
shall take effect and be in force from and after July 1, 2023.






MISSISSIPPI LEGISLATURE
2023 Regular Session
To: Insurance; Medicaid
By: Senator(s) Sojourner, Chism, McDaniel
Senate Bill 2864
AN ACT TO CREATE NEW SECTION 43-13-117.7, MISSISSIPPI CODE
OF 1972, TO PROHIBIT THE DIVISION OF MEDICAID FROM REIMBURSING ANY ENTITY FOR PART
OR ALL OF THE COSTS OF CARE AND SERVICES RENDERED FOR GENDER REASSIGNMENT
SURGERY OR SERVICES; TO CREATE NEW SECTION 83-9-401, MISSISSIPPI CODE OF 1972,
TO PROHIBIT HEALTH COVERAGE PLANS THAT ARE FUNDED WHOLLY OR IN PART BY STATE
FUNDS OR STATE-EMPLOYEE CONTRIBUTIONS FROM REIMBURSING OR AUTHORIZING PAYMENT
OF PART OR ALL OF THE COSTS OF CARE AND SERVICES RENDERED BY ANY ENTITY FOR
GENDER REASSIGNMENT SURGERY OR SERVICES; AND FOR RELATED PURPOSES.
     BE IT ENACTED BY THE
LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF MISSISSIPPI:
     SECTION 1.  The
following shall be codified as Section 43-13-117.7, Mississippi Code of 1972:
     (1)  For purposes of this section,
the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed herein:
          (a)  "Biological sex"
means the biological indication of male and female in the context of reproductive
potential or capacity, such as sex chromosomes, naturally occurring sex hormones,
gonads and nonambiguous internal and external genitalia present at birth, without
regard to an individual's psychological, chosen or subjective experience of gender;
          (b)  "Gender"
means the psychological, behavioral, social and cultural aspects of being male or
female;
          (c)  "Gender reassignment
surgery or service" means any medical or surgical service that seeks to surgically
alter or otherwise remove healthy physical or anatomical characteristics or features
that are typical for the individual's biological sex in order to instill or create
physiological or anatomical characteristics that resemble a sex different from the
individual's biological sex, including without limitation, genital or nongenital
gender reassignment surgery performed for the purpose of assisting an individual
with a gender transition.
     (2)  The division shall not authorize
payment of part or all of the costs of care and services rendered by any entity
for gender reassignment surgery or services.
     SECTION 2.  The
following shall be codified as Section 83-9-401, Mississippi Code of 1972:
     (1)  For purposes of this section,
the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed herein:
          (a)  "Biological sex"
means the biological indication of male and female in the context of reproductive
potential or capacity, such as sex chromosomes, naturally occurring sex hormones,
gonads and nonambiguous internal and external genitalia present at birth, without
regard to an individual's psychological, chosen or subjective experience of gender;
          (b)  "Gender"
means the psychological, behavioral, social and cultural aspects of being male or
female;
          (c)  "Gender reassignment
surgery or service" means any medical or surgical service that seeks to surgically
alter or otherwise remove healthy physical or anatomical characteristics or features
that are typical for the individual's biological sex in order to instill or create
physiological or anatomical characteristics that resemble a sex different from the
individual's biological sex, including without limitation, genital or nongenital
gender reassignment surgery performed for the purpose of assisting an individual
with a gender transition;
          (d)  "Health coverage
plan" shall mean any health or medical expense insurance policy, hospital or
medical service contract, employee welfare benefit plan, contract or agreement with
a health maintenance organization or a preferred provider organization, health and
accident insurance policy, including a group insurance plan and the State Health
Plan.
     (2)  No health coverage plan
that is funded wholly or in part by state funds or state-employee contributions
shall reimburse or authorize payment of part or all of the costs of care and services
rendered by any entity for gender reassignment surgery or services.
     SECTION 3.  This act
shall take effect and be in force from and after July 1, 2023.




 



 


 

		By: Swanson
H.B. No. 23




 


 



 		
			

A BILL TO BE ENTITLED




 
			

AN ACT




 
			
relating to participation in athletic activities based on 



 
			
biological sex; providing a civil right to action for K-12 athletes 



 
			
and college athletes.



 
			
       BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF TEXAS:



 
			
       SECTION 1.  SHORT TITLE.  This Act may be cited as the Save 



 
			
Women's Sports Act.



 
			
       SECTION 2.  Section 33.0834, Texas Education Code, is 



 
			
amended to read as follows:



 
			
       Sec. 33.0834.  INTERSCHOLASTIC ATHLETIC COMPETITION



 
			
PARTICIPATION BASED ON BIOLOGICAL SEX.  (a)  Except as provided by 



 
			
Subsection (b), an interscholastic athletic team or sport sponsored 



 
			
or authorized by a school district,or open-enrollment charter 



 
			
school, or any private school that competes against a public school



 
			
may not allow a student to competeparticipate in an 



 
			
interscholastic athletic competitionteam or sport sponsored or 



 
			
authorized by the district or school that is designated for the 



 
			
biological sex opposite to the student's biological sex as 



 
			
correctly stated on:



 
			
             (1)  the student's official birth certificate, as 



 
			
described by Subsection (c); or



 
			
             (2)  if the student's official birth certificate 



 
			
described by Subdivision (1) is unobtainable, another government 



 
			
record that accurately states the student's biological sex.



 
			
       (b)  An interscholastic athletic team or sport described by 



 
			
Subsection (a) may allow a female student to competeparticipate in 



 
			
an interscholastic athletic competitionteam or sport that is 



 
			
designated for male students if a corresponding interscholastic



 
			
athletic competitionteam or sport designated for female students 



 
			
is not offered or available.



 
			
       (c)  For purposes of this section, a statement of a student's 



 
			
biological sex on the student's official birth certificate is 



 
			
considered to have correctly stated the student's biological sex 



 
			
only if the statement was:



 
			
             (1)  entered at or near the time of the student's birth; 



 
			
or



 
			
             (2)  modified to correct any type of scrivener or 



 
			
clerical error in the student's biological sex.



 
			
       (d)  The University Interscholastic League shall adopt rules 



 
			
to implement this section, provided that the rules must be approved 



 
			
by the commissioner in accordance with Section 33.083(b).  The 



 
			
rules must ensure compliance with state and federal law regarding 



 
			
the confidentiality of student medical information, including 



 
			
Chapter 181, Health and Safety Code, and the Health Insurance 



 
			
Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (42 U.S.C. Section 1320d 



 
			
et seq.).



 
			
       (e)  A student shall have a private cause of action for 



 
			
injunctive relief, damages, attorneys' fees and cost, and any other 



 
			
relief available under law if the student is:



 
			
             (1)  deprived of an athletic opportunity or suffers any 



 
			
direct or indirect harm as a result of a school district, charter 



 
			
school, or private school knowingly violating this Act; or



 
			
             (2)  subject to retaliation or other adverse action by 



 
			
a school district, charter school, private school, the University 



 
			
Interscholastic League, or any athletic association or 



 
			
organization as a result of reporting a violation of this Act.



 
			
       SECTION 3.  Subchapter Z, Chapter 51, Education Code, is 



 
			
amended by adding Section 51.982 to read as follows:



 
			
       Sec. 51.982.  ATHLETIC PARTICIPATION BASED ON BIOLOGICAL 



 
			
SEX.  (a)  Except as provided by Subsection (b), an athletic team or 



 
			
sport sponsored or authorized by a public institution of higher 



 
			
education, public junior college, or any private institution or 



 
			
private junior college that competes against a public institution 



 
			
or public junior college may not allow a student to participate in 



 
			
an athletic team or sport sponsored or authorized by the 



 
			
institution of higher education or junior college that is 



 
			
designated for the biological sex opposite to the student's 



 
			
biological sex as correctly stated on:



 
			
             (1)  the student's official birth certificate, as 



 
			
described by Subsection (c); or



 
			
             (2)  if the student's official birth certificate 



 
			
described by Subdivision (1) is unobtainable, another government 



 
			
record that accurately states the student's biological sex.



 
			
       (b)  An athletic team or sport described by Subsection (a) 



 
			
may allow a female student to participate in an athletic team or 



 
			
sport that is designated for male students if a corresponding 



 
			
athletic team or sport designated for female students is not 



 
			
offered or available.



 
			
       (c)  For purposes of this section, a statement of a student's 



 
			
biological sex on the student's official birth certificate is 



 
			
considered to have correctly stated the student's biological sex 



 
			
only if the statement was:



 
			
             (1)  entered at or near the time of the student's birth; 



 
			
or



 
			
             (2)  modified to correct any type of scrivener or 



 
			
clerical error in the student's biological sex.



 
			
       (d)  A student shall have a private cause of action for 



 
			
injunctive relief, damages, attorneys' fees and cost, and any other 



 
			
relief available under law if the student is:



 
			
             (1)  deprived of an athletic opportunity or suffers any 



 
			
direct or indirect harm as a result of an institution of higher 



 
			
education or junior college knowingly violating this Act; or



 
			
             (2)  subject to retaliation or other adverse action by 



 
			
an institution of higher education, junior college, or any athletic 



 
			
association or organization as a result of reporting a violation of 



 
			
this Act.



 
			
       SECTION 4.  This Act takes effect immediately if it receives 



 
			
a vote of two-thirds of all the members elected to each house, as 



 
			
provided by Section 39, Article III, Texas Constitution.  If this 



 
			
Act does not receive the vote necessary for immediate effect, this 



 
			
Act takes effect September 1, 2023.





 
88R10711 SCL-D


 


 

		By: Hall
S.B. No. 1029




 


 



 		
			

A BILL TO BE ENTITLED




 
			

AN ACT




 
			
relating to civil liability for, governmental health plan coverage 



 
			
of, and public funding for gender modification procedures and 



 
			
treatments.



 
			
       BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF TEXAS:



 
			
       SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that:



 
			
             (1)  as evidenced by a 2018 video of a Vanderbilt 



 
			
University Medical Center administrator who promoted gender 



 
			
modification surgeries as financially beneficial and stated that 



 
			
entire clinics are being financed by phalloplasties, the medical 



 
			
community has knowledge that many so-called "gender affirming" 



 
			
treatments are not in the best interest of the health of the patient 



 
			
but rather are being promoted for the monetary gain the health care 



 
			
facilities will receive from providing those treatments; and



 
			
             (2)  the medical community has a conflict of interest 



 
			
in offering gender modification treatments and procedures because 



 
			
those treatments and procedures create lifelong patients as a 



 
			
result of required follow-up visits after those treatments and 



 
			
procedures.



 
			
       SECTION 2.  Title 4, Civil Practice and Remedies Code, is 



 
			
amended by adding Chapter 74B to read as follows:



 
			
CHAPTER 74B. LIABILITY FOR GENDER MODIFICATION PROCEDURES AND 



 
			
TREATMENTS



 
			
       Sec. 74B.001.  DEFINITION.  In this chapter, "gender 



 
			
modification procedure or treatment" means a health care procedure 



 
			
or treatment provided for the purpose of transitioning a patient's 



 
			
biological sex, as determined by the patient's sex organs, 



 
			
chromosomes, and endogenous profiles, or affirming the patient's 



 
			
perception of the patient's sex if that perception is inconsistent 



 
			
with the patient's sex.  The term includes:



 
			
             (1)  a surgery that sterilizes the patient, including:



 
			
                   (A)  castration;



 
			
                   (B)  vasectomy;



 
			
                   (C)  hysterectomy;



 
			
                   (D)  oophorectomy;



 
			
                   (E)  metoidioplasty;



 
			
                   (F)  orchiectomy;



 
			
                   (G)  penectomy;



 
			
                   (H)  phalloplasty; and



 
			
                   (I)  vaginoplasty;



 
			
             (2)  a mastectomy;



 
			
             (3)  the prescription, administration, or supply of any 



 
			
of the following medications that induce transient or permanent 



 
			
infertility:



 
			
                   (A)  puberty-blocking medication to stop or delay 



 
			
normal puberty;



 
			
                   (B)  supraphysiologic doses of testosterone to 



 
			
females; or



 
			
                   (C)  supraphysiologic doses of estrogen to males; 



 
			
and



 
			
             (4)  the removal of any otherwise healthy or 



 
			
non-diseased body part or tissue.



 
			
       Sec. 74B.002.  CONFLICT OF LAWS.  To the extent this chapter 



 
			
conflicts with another law, this chapter prevails.



 
			
       Sec. 74B.003.  STRICT LIABILITY FOR HEALTH COVERAGE.  A 



 
			
health benefit plan issuer is strictly liable to a patient for the 



 
			
patient's medical, mental health, and pharmaceutical costs, 



 
			
including costs associated with reversing a gender modification 



 
			
procedure or treatment, incurred for the life of the patient as a 



 
			
result of a gender modification procedure or treatment covered by 



 
			
the issuer's plan.



 
			
       Sec. 74B.004.  LIABILITY FOR PHYSICIAN OR HEALTH CARE 



 
			
PROVIDER.  A physician or health care provider who provides a gender 



 
			
modification procedure or treatment to a patient is:



 
			
             (1)  liable to the patient for a malpractice claim in 



 
			
the provision of the procedure or treatment; and



 
			
             (2)  strictly liable to the patient for the patient's 



 
			
medical, mental health, and pharmaceutical costs, including costs 



 
			
associated with reversing a gender modification procedure or 



 
			
treatment, incurred for the life of the patient as a result of the 



 
			
procedure or treatment.



 
			
       Sec. 74B.005.  EXCEPTIONS.  Sections 74B.003 and 74B.004 do 



 
			
not apply to the provision by a physician or health care provider, 



 
			
with the consent of a child's parent or legal guardian, if 



 
			
applicable, and the coverage by a health benefit plan of 



 
			
appropriate and medically necessary gender modification procedures 



 
			
or treatments to a patient who:



 
			
             (1)  is born with a medically verifiable genetic 



 
			
disorder of sex development, including:



 
			
                   (A)  46,XX chromosomes with virilization;



 
			
                   (B)  46,XY chromosomes with undervirilization; or



 
			
                   (C)  both ovarian and testicular tissue; or



 
			
             (2)  does not have the normal sex chromosome structure 



 
			
for male or female as determined by a physician through genetic 



 
			
testing.



 
			
       SECTION 3.  Subtitle F, Title 10, Government Code, is 



 
			
amended by adding Chapter 2273A to read as follows:



 
			
CHAPTER 2273A. PROHIBITED USES OF PUBLIC MONEY



 
			
       Sec. 2273A.001.  DEFINITIONS.  In this chapter:



 
			
             (1)  "Gender modification procedure or treatment" has 



 
			
the meaning assigned by Section 74B.001, Civil Practice and 



 
			
Remedies Code.



 
			
             (2)  "Governmental entity" means this state, a state 



 
			
agency, or a political subdivision.



 
			
       Sec. 2273A.002.  USE FOR GENDER MODIFICATION PROCEDURE OR 



 
			
TREATMENT.  A governmental entity may not use or provide public 



 
			
money for the provision or administration of a gender modification 



 
			
procedure or treatment.



 
			
       SECTION 4.  Subtitle E, Title 8, Insurance Code, is amended 



 
			
by adding Chapter 1372 to read as follows:



 
			
CHAPTER 1372. PROHIBITED COVERAGE OF GENDER MODIFICATION 



 
			
PROCEDURES AND TREATMENTS



 
			
       Sec. 1372.001.  DEFINITION.  In this chapter, "gender 



 
			
modification procedure or treatment" has the meaning assigned by 



 
			
Section 74B.001, Civil Practice and Remedies Code.



 
			
       Sec. 1372.002.  APPLICABILITY OF CHAPTER.  Notwithstanding 



 
			
any other law, this chapter applies only to:



 
			
             (1)  a basic coverage plan under Chapter 1551;



 
			
             (2)  a basic plan under Chapter 1575;



 
			
             (3)  a primary care coverage plan under Chapter 1579;



 
			
             (4)  a plan providing basic coverage under Chapter 



 
			
1601;



 
			
             (5)  the state Medicaid program, including the Medicaid 



 
			
managed care program operated under Chapter 533, Government Code; 



 
			
and



 
			
             (6)  the child health plan program under Chapter 62, 



 
			
Health and Safety Code.



 
			
       Sec. 1372.003.  PROHIBITED COVERAGE; EXCEPTION.  (a)  A 



 
			
health benefit plan may not provide coverage for a gender 



 
			
modification procedure or treatment.



 
			
       (b)  This section does not apply to the coverage by a health 



 
			
benefit plan of appropriate and medically necessary gender 



 
			
modification procedures or treatments to a patient who:



 
			
             (1)  is born with a medically verifiable genetic 



 
			
disorder of sex development, including:



 
			
                   (A)  46,XX chromosomes with virilization;



 
			
                   (B)  46,XY chromosomes with undervirilization; or



 
			
                   (C)  both ovarian and testicular tissue; or



 
			
             (2)  does not have the normal sex chromosome structure 



 
			
for male or female as determined by a physician through genetic 



 
			
testing.



 
			
       SECTION 5.  (a)  Chapter 74B, Civil Practice and Remedies 



 
			
Code, as added by this Act, applies only to a cause of action that 



 
			
accrues on or after the effective date of this Act.



 
			
       (b)  The changes in law made by this Act apply only to a 



 
			
health benefit plan delivered, issued for delivery, or renewed on 



 
			
or after the effective date of this Act.



 
			
       SECTION 6.  This Act takes effect September 1, 2023.





MISSISSIPPI LEGISLATURE
2023 Regular Session
To: Education
By: Senator(s) Hill, Seymour, Chism
Senate Bill 2765
AN ACT ENTITLED THE "MISSISSIPPI FAMILIES' RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
ACT"; TO PROVIDE DEFINITIONS; TO PROVIDE THAT ALL PARENTAL RIGHTS ARE EXCLUSIVELY
RESERVED TO A PARENT OF A CHILD WITHOUT INTERFERENCE FROM THE STATE OR POLITICAL
SUBDIVISION OF THE STATE; TO PROVIDE THAT THE LOCAL SCHOOL BOARD IN CONSULTATION
WITH PARENTS AND TEACHERS SHALL DEVELOP AND ADOPT A POLICY TO PROMOTE THE INVOLVEMENT
OF PARENTS OF CHILDREN ENROLLED IN THE PUBLIC SCHOOLS; TO REQUIRE PUBLIC SCHOOLS
TO ADOPT PROCEDURES TO ENSURE THAT A PARENT PROVIDES WRITTEN PERMISSION BEFORE THEIR
CHILD PARTICIPATES IN IDENTITY CURRICULUM OR CRITICAL THEORY CURRICULUM AND ALLOW
PARENTS TO EXEMPT THEIR CHILD FROM ANY SPECIFIC LESSONS THAT ARE OBJECTIONABLE TO
THE FAMILY; TO REQUIRE PARENTAL CONSENT FOR MEDICAL AND MENTAL HEALTH CARE; TO PROVIDE
A CAUSE OF ACTION FOR VIOLATIONS OF THIS ACT; TO PROVIDE RULES OF CONSTRUCTION;
TO AMEND SECTION 37-13-9, MISSISSIPPI CODE OF 1972, IN CONFORMITY; TO BRING FORWARD
SECTIONS 41-41-3, 41-41-7 AND 41-41-11, MISSISSIPPI CODE OF 1972, RELATING TO IMPLIED
CONSENT FOR MEDICAL PROCEDURES ON MINORS; AND FOR RELATED PURPOSES.
     BE IT ENACTED BY THE
LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF MISSISSIPPI:
     SECTION 1.  This
act shall be known and may be cited as the "Mississippi Families' Rights and
Responsibilities Act."
     SECTION 2.  As
used in this act:
          (a)  The term
"child" means an individual under the age of eighteen (18).
          (b)  The term
"curriculum" includes all textbooks, reading materials, handouts, videos,
presentations, digital materials, websites, online applications, digital applications
for a phone, laptop, or tablet, questionnaires, surveys, or other written or
electronic materials that have been or will be assigned, distributed, or
otherwise presented physically or virtually to students in a class or course.
          (c)
 The term "identity curriculum" means curriculum that has the goal or
purpose of studying, exploring, or informing students about gender roles or
stereotypes, gender identity, gender expression, sexual orientation, or
romantic or sexual relationships.
          (d)
 The term "critical theory curriculum" means curriculum that discusses
any of the following concepts:
               (i)
 The United States or the State of Mississippi is fundamentally, inherently, or
irredeemably racist, sexist, oppressive or discriminatory;
               (ii)
 An individual, by virtue of sex, race, ethnicity, religion, color or national
origin, is inherently racist, sexist, oppressive or discriminatory whether
consciously or unconsciously;
               (iii)
 An individual, by virtue of sex, race, ethnicity, religion, color or national
origin, should be blamed or held responsible for actions committed in the past
by other members of the individual's sex, race, ethnicity, religion, color or
national origin;
               (iv)
 An individual's moral character is necessarily determined, in whole or in
part, by the individual's sex, race, ethnicity, religion, color or national
origin;
               (v)
 An individual should feel guilt, blame, discomfort, anguish, or any other form
of psychological distress on account of the individual's sex, race, ethnicity,
religion, color or national origin; or
               (vi)  Any individual, by virtue of sex,
race, ethnicity, religion, color or national origin, is marginalized as
perpetually victimized or unable to advance in society due to being victimized,
marginalized, or oppressed by others.
          (e)  The term
"educational records" includes attendance records, test scores of school-administered
tests and state-wide assessments, grades, extracurricular activity or club participation,
email accounts, online or virtual accounts or data, disciplinary records,
counseling records, psychological records, applications for admission, health
and immunization information, including any medical records maintained by a
health clinic or medical facility operated or controlled by the school district
or located on district property, teacher and counselor evaluations, and reports
of behavioral patterns.
          (f)  The term
"parent" means a biological parent of a child, an adoptive parent of a
child, or an individual who has been granted exclusive right and authority over
the welfare of a child under state law.
          (g)  The term
"substantial burden" means any action that directly or indirectly constrains,
inhibits, curtails, or denies the right of a parent to direct the upbringing,
education, health care, and mental health of that parent's child or compels any
action contrary to the right of a parent to direct the upbringing, education,
health care, and mental health of that parent's child.  It includes, but is not
limited to, withholding benefits, assessing criminal, civil, or administrative
penalties or damages, or exclusion from governmental programs.
          (h)  The term
"teacher-training materials" means any presentations, videos, professional
development classes, or other educational or training activities, including any
written or electronic materials used or distributed in the activities, that a
teacher is required to attend by a public school.
     SECTION 3.  Parental
rights are fundamental.  (1)  The liberty of a parent to direct the
upbringing, education, health care, and mental health of that parent's child is
a fundamental right.
     (2)  This state, any
political subdivision of this state, or any other governmental entity shall not
substantially burden the fundamental right of a parent to direct the
upbringing, education, health care, and mental health of that parent's child
without demonstrating that the burden is required by a compelling governmental
interest of the highest order as applied to the parent and the child and is the
least restrictive means of furthering that compelling governmental interest.
     SECTION 4.  Rights
and responsibilities.  (1)  All parental rights are exclusively reserved to
a parent of a child without obstruction by or interference from this state, any
political subdivision of this state, any other governmental entity, or any
other institution, including, without limitation, the following rights and
responsibilities:
          (a)  To direct the
education of the child, including the right to choose public, private,
religious or home schools, and the right to make reasonable choices within
public schools for the education of the child;
          (b)  To access and
review all written and electronic educational records relating to the child
that are controlled by or in the possession of a school, including, but not
limited to all:
               (i)  Attendance
records;
               (ii)  Test scores
of school-administered tests and state-wide assessments;
               (iii)  Grades;
               (iv)  Extracurricular
activity or club participation;
               (v)  Their child's
email accounts;
               (vi)  Their
child's online or virtual accounts or data;
               (vii)  Disciplinary
records;
               (viii)  Counseling
records;
               (ix)  Psychological
records;
               (x)  Applications
for admission;
               (xi)  Health and
immunization information, including any medical records maintained by a health
clinic or medical facility operated or controlled by the school district or
located on district property;
               (xii)  Teacher and
counselor evaluations; and
               (xiii)  Reports of
behavioral patterns;
          (c)  To direct the
upbringing of the child;
          (d)  To direct the
moral or religious training of the child;
          (e)  To make and
consent in writing to all physical and mental health care decisions for the
child;
          (f)  To access and
review all health and medical records of the child;
          (g)  To consent in
writing before a biometric scan of the child is made, shared, or stored;
          (h)  To consent in
writing before any record of the child's blood or deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA)
is created, stored, or shared, unless authorized pursuant to a court order;
          (i)  To consent in
writing before any governmental entity makes a video or voice recording of the
child, unless the video or voice recording is made during or as a part of:
               (i)  A court
proceeding;
               (ii)  A law
enforcement investigation;
               (iii)  A forensic
interview in a criminal or Department of Child Services investigation;
               (iv)  The security
or surveillance of buildings or grounds; or
               (v)  A photo
identification card;
          (j)  To be notified
promptly if an employee of this state, any political subdivision of this state,
any other governmental entity, or any other institution suspects that abuse,
neglect, or any criminal offense has been committed against the child;
          (k)  To opt the child
out of any personal analysis, evaluation, survey, or data collection by a
school district that would capture data for inclusion in the State Longitudinal
Student Data System except what is necessary and essential for establish a
student' educational record;
          (l)  The right to have
the child excused from school attendance for religious purposes; and
          (m)  The right to participant
in parent-teacher associations and school organizations that are sanctioned by
the board of education of a school district.
     (2)  This section does not
authorize or allow a parent to abuse or neglect a child as defined in Sections 97-5-39
and 43-21-105, Mississippi Code of 1972.  This section does not apply to a
parental action or decision that would end life.  This section does not
prohibit a court from issuing an order that is otherwise permitted by law.
     (3)  No employee of this
state, any political subdivision of this state, or any other governmental
entity, except for law enforcement personnel, shall encourage or coerce a child
to withhold information from the child's parent.  Nor shall any such employee
withhold from a child's parent information that is relevant to the physical,
emotional, or mental health of the child, or any information regarding the
child's curricular or extracurricular projects, assignments, or activities.
     SECTION 5.  Educational
involvement.  (1)  The board of education of a school district, in
consultation with parents, teachers and administrators, shall develop and adopt
a policy to promote the involvement of parents of children enrolled in the
schools within the school district, including:
          (a)  A plan for parent
participation in the schools which is designed to improve parent and teacher
cooperation in such areas as homework, attendance and discipline;
          (b)  Procedures by
which a parent may learn about the course of study for that parent's child and
review all curriculum.  These procedures shall allow a parent to:
               (i)  Review a syllabus,
all curriculum, and all teacher-training materials for each class or course
that the parent's child is enrolled in at least seven (7) days prior to the
start of each class or course.  The syllabus shall include a written
description of all topics and subjects taught in a class or course, and shall
include a list of all curriculum used in the class or course, the identity of all
individuals providing in-person or live remote instruction in the class or
course, and a description of any assemblies, guest lectures, field trips or
other educational activities that are part of the class or course;
               (ii)  Review all
curriculum added after the start of a class or course after at least three (3)
days prior to the curriculum being taught or used for instruction;
               (iii)  Copy and
record information from the curriculum and teacher-training materials; and
               (iv)  Meet with
the teacher of the class or course, the principal, or other representative from
the school to discuss the curriculum and teacher-training materials;
          (c)  Procedures to
notify a parent at least three (3) days in advance and obtain the parent's
written consent before the parent's child attends any instruction or
presentation that has the goal or purpose of studying, exploring, or informing
students about gender roles or stereotypes, gender identity, gender expression,
sexual orientation, romantic or sexual relationships, or critical theory curriculum.
 For any child who does not attend any instruction or presentation pursuant to
this subsection, the school: 
               (i)  Shall provide
to the child alternative educational instruction that furthers the completion
of any grade level or graduation requirements and does not include any of the
objectionable content; and
               (ii)  Shall not
impose an academic or other penalty upon the child;
          (d)  Procedures by which
a parent who objects to any specific instruction or presentation on the basis
that it is harmful may withdraw that parent's child from the instruction or presentation.
 Objection to a specific instruction or presentation on the basis that it is
harmful includes, but it is not limited to, objection to a material or activity
because it questions beliefs or practices regarding sex, morality, or religion;
          (e)  Procedures by
which a parent may learn about the nature and purpose of clubs and
extracurricular activities that have been approved by the school and may
withdraw that parent's child from any club or extracurricular to which the
parent objects;
          (f)  Procedures by
which a parent must provide written consent before their child uses a name or
nickname other than their legal name, or before a child uses a pronoun that
does not align with the child's sex.  However, even if a parent provides
written consent, no person shall be compelled to use pronouns that do not align
with the child's sex; and 
          (g)  Procedures by
which a parent may learn about parental rights and responsibilities under the
laws of this state.
     (2)  The board of education
of a school district may adopt a policy to provide to parents the information
required by this section in an electronic form.
     (3)  A parent shall submit a
written or electronic request for information pursuant to this section to
either the school principal or the superintendent of the school district.  Within
five (5) days of receiving the request for information, the school principal or
the superintendent shall either deliver the requested information to the parent
or submit to the parent a written explanation of the reasons for the denial of
the requested information.  If the request for information is denied or the
parent does not receive the requested information in the allotted time, the
parent may submit a written request for the information to the board of
education of the school district, which shall formally consider the request
during executive session at the next meeting of the board.
     SECTION 6.  Medical
and mental health care.  (1)  Except as otherwise provided by law or court
order, a person, corporation, association, organization, state-supported
institution, or individual employed by any of these entities must obtain the
consent of a parent of a child before taking any of the following actions:
          (a)  Procuring,
soliciting to perform, arranging for the performance of, providing a referral
for, or performing surgical procedures upon a child;
          (b)  Procuring,
soliciting to perform, arranging for the performance of, providing a referral
for, or performing a physical examination upon a child;
          (c)  Prescribing or dispensing
any medication or prescription drugs to a child; or
          (d)  Procuring,
soliciting to perform, arranging for the performance of, providing a referral
for, or performing a mental health evaluation in a clinical or nonclinical
setting or mental health treatment on a child.
     (2)  If the parental consent
pursuant to subsection (1) of this section is given through telemedicine, the
person or entity obtaining parental consent must verify the identity of the
parent at the site where the consent is given.
     (3)  The provisions of this
section shall not apply when it has been determined by a physician that:
          (a)  An emergency exists;
and 
          (b)  Either of the
following conditions is true:
               (i)  It is necessary
to perform an activity listed in subsection (1) of this section in order to
prevent death or imminent, irreparable physical injury to the child; or
               (ii)  A parent of
the child cannot be located or contacted after a reasonably diligent effort.
     (4)  The provisions of this section
do not apply to an abortion, which shall be governed by Section 41-41-51 et seq.,
Mississippi Code of 1972.
     SECTION 7.  Cause
of action.  (1)  A parent may bring suit for any violation of this act and
may raise the act as a defense in any judicial or administrative proceeding
without regard to whether the proceeding is brought by or in the name of the state
government, any private person, or any other party.
     (2)  Notwithstanding any
other provision of law, an action under this act may be commenced, and relief
may be granted, without regard to whether the person commencing the action has
sought or exhausted available administrative remedies.
     (3)  Any person who successfully
asserts a claim or defense under this act may recover declaratory relief,
injunctive relief, compensatory damages reasonable attorneys' fees and costs,
and any other appropriate relief.
     (4)  Sovereign, governmental
and qualified immunities to suit and from liability are waived and abolished to
the extent of liability created by this act.
     SECTION 8.  Rules
of construction.  (1)  Unless those rights have been legally waived or
legally terminated, parents have inalienable rights that are more comprehensive
than those listed in this section.  The protections of the fundamental right of
parents to direct the upbringing, education, health care and mental health of
their child afforded by this act are in addition to the protections provided
under federal law, state law, and the state and federal constitutions.
     (2)  This act shall be
construed in favor of a broad protection of the fundamental right of parents to
direct the upbringing, education, health care and mental health of their child.
     (3)  Nothing in this act
shall be construed to authorize any government to burden the fundamental right
of parents to direct the upbringing, education, health care and mental health
of their child.
     (4)  If a child has no
affirmative right of access to a particular medical or mental health procedure
or service, then nothing in this act shall be construed to grant that child's
parent an affirmative right of access to that procedure or service on that
child's behalf.
     (5)  State statutory law
adopted after the date of the enactment of this act is subject to this act
unless such law explicitly excludes such application by reference to this act.
     SECTION 9.  Section
37-13-9, Mississippi Code of 1972, is amended as follows:
     37-13-9.  The State Board of
Education is hereby authorized to appoint a curriculum committee, composed of
professional and lay members, not to exceed seven (7) in number, to make
a continuous study of the curriculum of the public schools and to make recommendations
to the State Board of Education from time to time as to changes which should be
made in the curriculum in the grammar school grades and in the high school
grades.  On or before July 1, 2023, and annually thereafter, the curriculum committee
shall develop a report to the State Board of Education and the Legislature relating
to the compliance of each public school district and school in the state with the
provisions of the "Mississippi Families' Rights and Responsibilities Act"
with recommendations to the Commission on School Accreditation regarding the continued
accreditation of each school district and school based on compliance with said act. 
The members of such committee as of July 1, 1954, shall continue to serve until
the expiration of the terms for which they were appointed; thereafter,
the members of such committee shall be appointed and serve for a term of two (2)
years and until their successors are appointed.  Each member of said committee
shall receive a per diem of Fifteen Dollars ($15.00) for each day actually
spent attending the meetings of the committee and, in addition, each member
shall be reimbursed for actual travel expenses at the rate of Six Cents ($.06)
per mile for each mile traveled in attending the meetings of the committee.  However,
the total amount paid to any member of the committee for per diem shall not
exceed the sum of One Hundred Fifty Dollars ($150.00) in any one (1)
year.  The per diem and travel expenses provided for herein shall be paid out
of such appropriation as may be made for such purpose by the Legislature.
     SECTION 10.  Section
41-41-3, Mississippi Code of 1972, is brought forward as follows:
     41-41-3.  (1)  It is hereby
recognized and established that, in addition to such other persons as may be so
authorized and empowered, any one (1) of the following persons who is
reasonably available, in descending order of priority, is authorized and empowered
to consent on behalf of an unemancipated minor, either orally or otherwise, to
any surgical or medical treatment or procedures not prohibited by law which may
be suggested, recommended, prescribed or directed by a duly licensed physician:
          (a)  The minor's
guardian or custodian.
          (b)  The minor's
parent.
          (c)  An adult brother
or sister of the minor.
          (d)  The minor's
grandparent.
     (2)  If none of the
individuals eligible to act under subsection (1) is reasonably available, an
adult who has exhibited special care and concern for the minor and who is
reasonably available may act; the adult shall communicate the assumption of
authority as promptly as practicable to the individuals specified in subsection
(1) who can be readily contacted.
     (3)  Any female, regardless
of age or marital status, is empowered to give consent for herself in connection
with pregnancy or childbirth.
     SECTION 11.  Section
41-41-7, Mississippi Code of 1972, is brought forward as follows:
     41-41-7.  In addition to any other instances in
which a consent is excused or implied at law, a consent to surgical or medical
treatment or procedures, suggested, recommended, prescribed or directed by a
duly licensed physician, will be implied where an emergency exists if there has
been no protest or refusal of consent by a person authorized and empowered to
consent or, if so, there has been a subsequent change in the condition of the
person affected that is material and morbid, and there is no one immediately
available who is authorized, empowered, willing and capacitated to consent.  For
the purposes hereof, an emergency is defined as a situation wherein, in
competent medical judgment, the proposed surgical or medical treatment or
procedures are immediately or imminently necessary and any delay occasioned by
an attempt to obtain a consent would reasonably jeopardize the life, health or
limb of the person affected, or would reasonably result in disfigurement or
impairment of faculties.
     SECTION 12.  Section
41-41-11, Mississippi Code of 1972, is brought forward as follows:
     41-41-11.  Any person
authorized and empowered to consent to surgical or medical treatment or
procedures for himself or another may also waive the medical privilege for
himself or the other person and consent to the disclosure of medical
information and the making and delivery of copies of medical or hospital
records. Any such waiver or consent shall survive the death of the person
giving the same.  No such waiver shall be needed for the cooperation with the
furnishing of information to the State Department of Health, its
representatives or employees in the discharge of their official duties. 
However, the State Department of Health shall not reveal the name of a patient
with his case history without having first been authorized to do so by the
patient, his personal representative, or legal heirs in case there be no personal
representative.
     SECTION 13.  This act
shall take effect and be in force from and after July 1, 2023.







 
88R4402 EAS-F


 


 

		By: Oliverson
H.B. No. 1686




 


 



 		
			

A BILL TO BE ENTITLED




 
			

AN ACT




 
			
relating to prohibitions on the provision to certain children of 



 
			
procedures and treatments for gender transitioning, gender 



 
			
reassignment, or gender dysphoria and on the use of public money or 



 
			
public assistance to provide those procedures and treatments.



 
			
       BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF TEXAS:



 
			
       SECTION 1.  Section 62.151, Health and Safety Code, is 



 
			
amended by adding Subsection (g) to read as follows:



 
			
       (g)  The child health plan may not provide coverage for 



 
			
services prohibited by Section 161.702 that are intended to 



 
			
transition a child's biological sex as determined by the child's sex 



 
			
organs, chromosomes, and endogenous profiles.



 
			
       SECTION 2.  Chapter 161, Health and Safety Code, is amended 



 
			
by adding Subchapter X to read as follows:



 
			
SUBCHAPTER X.  GENDER TRANSITIONING AND GENDER REASSIGNMENT 



 
			
PROCEDURES AND TREATMENTS FOR CERTAIN CHILDREN



 
			
       Sec. 161.701.  DEFINITIONS.  In this subchapter:



 
			
             (1)  "Child" means an individual who is younger than 18 



 
			
years of age.



 
			
             (2)  "Health care provider" means a person other than a 



 
			
physician who is licensed, certified, or otherwise authorized by 



 
			
this state's laws to provide or render health care or to dispense or 



 
			
prescribe a prescription drug in the ordinary course of business or 



 
			
practice of a profession.



 
			
             (3)  "Medicaid" means the medical assistance program 



 
			
established under Chapter 32, Human Resources Code.



 
			
             (4)  "Physician" means a person licensed to practice 



 
			
medicine in this state.



 
			
       Sec. 161.702.  PROHIBITED PROVISION OF GENDER TRANSITIONING 



 
			
OR GENDER REASSIGNMENT PROCEDURES AND TREATMENTS TO CERTAIN 



 
			
CHILDREN.  For the purpose of transitioning a child's biological 



 
			
sex as determined by the sex organs, chromosomes, and endogenous 



 
			
profiles of the child or affirming the child's perception of the 



 
			
child's sex if that perception is inconsistent with the child's 



 
			
biological sex, a physician or health care provider may not 



 
			
knowingly:



 
			
             (1)  perform a surgery that sterilizes the child, 



 
			
including:



 
			
                   (A)  castration;



 
			
                   (B)  vasectomy;



 
			
                   (C)  hysterectomy;



 
			
                   (D)  oophorectomy;



 
			
                   (E)  metoidioplasty;



 
			
                   (F)  orchiectomy;



 
			
                   (G)  penectomy;



 
			
                   (H)  phalloplasty; and



 
			
                   (I)  vaginoplasty;



 
			
             (2)  perform a mastectomy;



 
			
             (3)  provide, prescribe, administer, or dispense any of 



 
			
the following prescription drugs that induce transient or permanent 



 
			
infertility:



 
			
                   (A)  puberty suppression or blocking prescription 



 
			
drugs to stop or delay normal puberty;



 
			
                   (B)  supraphysiologic doses of testosterone to 



 
			
females; or



 
			
                   (C)  supraphysiologic doses of estrogen to males; 



 
			
or



 
			
             (4)  remove any otherwise healthy or non-diseased body 



 
			
part or tissue.



 
			
       Sec. 161.703.  EXCEPTIONS.  Section 161.702 does not apply 



 
			
to the provision by a physician or health care provider, with the 



 
			
consent of the child's parent or legal guardian, of:



 
			
             (1)  puberty suppression or blocking prescription 



 
			
drugs for the purpose of normalizing puberty for a minor 



 
			
experiencing precocious puberty; or



 
			
             (2)  appropriate and medically necessary procedures or 



 
			
treatments to a child who:



 
			
                   (A)  is born with a medically verifiable genetic 



 
			
disorder of sex development, including:



 
			
                         (i)  46,XX chromosomes with virilization;



 
			
                         (ii)  46,XY chromosomes with 



 
			
undervirilization; or



 
			
                         (iii)  both ovarian and testicular tissue; 



 
			
or



 
			
                   (B)  does not have the normal sex chromosome 



 
			
structure for male or female as determined by a physician through 



 
			
genetic testing.



 
			
       Sec. 161.704.  PROHIBITED USE OF PUBLIC MONEY.  Public money 



 
			
may not directly or indirectly be used, granted, paid, or 



 
			
distributed to any health care provider, medical school, hospital, 



 
			
physician, or any other entity, organization, or individual that 



 
			
provides or facilitates the provision of a procedure or treatment 



 
			
to a child that is prohibited under Section 161.702.



 
			
       Sec. 161.705.  PROHIBITED STATE HEALTH PLAN REIMBURSEMENT.  



 
			
The commission may not provide Medicaid reimbursement and the child 



 
			
health plan program established by Chapter 62 may not provide 



 
			
reimbursement to a physician or health care provider for provision 



 
			
of a procedure or treatment to a child that is prohibited under 



 
			
Section 161.702.



 
			
       Sec. 161.706.  ATTORNEY GENERAL ENFORCEMENT.  (a)  If the 



 
			
attorney general has reason to believe that a person is committing, 



 
			
has committed, or is about to commit a violation of Section 161.702, 



 
			
the attorney general may bring an action to enforce this subchapter 



 
			
to restrain or enjoin the person from committing, continuing to 



 
			
commit, or repeating the violation.



 
			
       (b)  Venue for an action brought under this section is in a 



 
			
district court of Travis County or the county where the violation 



 
			
occurred or is about to occur. 



 
			
       SECTION 3.  Section 32.024, Human Resources Code, is amended 



 
			
by adding Subsection (pp) to read as follows:



 
			
       (pp)  The medical assistance program may not provide 



 
			
coverage for services prohibited by Section 161.702, Health and 



 
			
Safety Code, that are intended to transition a child's biological 



 
			
sex as determined by the child's sex organs, chromosomes, and 



 
			
endogenous profiles.



 
			
       SECTION 4.  Section 164.052(a), Occupations Code, is amended 



 
			
to read as follows:



 
			
       (a)  A physician or an applicant for a license to practice 



 
			
medicine commits a prohibited practice if that person:



 
			
             (1)  submits to the board a false or misleading 



 
			
statement, document, or certificate in an application for a 



 
			
license;



 
			
             (2)  presents to the board a license, certificate, or 



 
			
diploma that was illegally or fraudulently obtained;



 
			
             (3)  commits fraud or deception in taking or passing an 



 
			
examination;



 
			
             (4)  uses alcohol or drugs in an intemperate manner 



 
			
that, in the board's opinion, could endanger a patient's life;



 
			
             (5)  commits unprofessional or dishonorable conduct 



 
			
that is likely to deceive or defraud the public, as provided by 



 
			
Section 164.053, or injure the public;



 
			
             (6)  uses an advertising statement that is false, 



 
			
misleading, or deceptive;



 
			
             (7)  advertises professional superiority or the 



 
			
performance of professional service in a superior manner if that 



 
			
advertising is not readily subject to verification;



 
			
             (8)  purchases, sells, barters, or uses, or offers to 



 
			
purchase, sell, barter, or use, a medical degree, license, 



 
			
certificate, or diploma, or a transcript of a license, certificate, 



 
			
or diploma in or incident to an application to the board for a 



 
			
license to practice medicine;



 
			
             (9)  alters, with fraudulent intent, a medical license, 



 
			
certificate, or diploma, or a transcript of a medical license, 



 
			
certificate, or diploma;



 
			
             (10)  uses a medical license, certificate, or diploma, 



 
			
or a transcript of a medical license, certificate, or diploma that 



 
			
has been:



 
			
                   (A)  fraudulently purchased or issued;



 
			
                   (B)  counterfeited; or



 
			
                   (C)  materially altered;



 
			
             (11)  impersonates or acts as proxy for another person 



 
			
in an examination required by this subtitle for a medical license;



 
			
             (12)  engages in conduct that subverts or attempts to 



 
			
subvert an examination process required by this subtitle for a 



 
			
medical license;



 
			
             (13)  impersonates a physician or permits another to 



 
			
use the person's license or certificate to practice medicine in 



 
			
this state;



 
			
             (14)  directly or indirectly employs a person whose 



 
			
license to practice medicine has been suspended, canceled, or 



 
			
revoked;



 
			
             (15)  associates in the practice of medicine with a 



 
			
person:



 
			
                   (A)  whose license to practice medicine has been 



 
			
suspended, canceled, or revoked; or



 
			
                   (B)  who has been convicted of the unlawful 



 
			
practice of medicine in this state or elsewhere;



 
			
             (16)  performs or procures a criminal abortion, aids or 



 
			
abets in the procuring of a criminal abortion, attempts to perform 



 
			
or procure a criminal abortion, or attempts to aid or abet the 



 
			
performance or procurement of a criminal abortion;



 
			
             (17)  directly or indirectly aids or abets the practice 



 
			
of medicine by a person, partnership, association, or corporation 



 
			
that is not licensed to practice medicine by the board;



 
			
             (18)  performs an abortion on a woman who is pregnant 



 
			
with a viable unborn child during the third trimester of the 



 
			
pregnancy unless:



 
			
                   (A)  the abortion is necessary to prevent the 



 
			
death of the woman;



 
			
                   (B)  the viable unborn child has a severe, 



 
			
irreversible brain impairment; or



 
			
                   (C)  the woman is diagnosed with a significant 



 
			
likelihood of suffering imminent severe, irreversible brain damage 



 
			
or imminent severe, irreversible paralysis;



 
			
             (19)  performs an abortion on an unemancipated minor 



 
			
without the written consent of the child's parent, managing 



 
			
conservator, or legal guardian or without a court order, as 



 
			
provided by Section 33.003 or 33.004, Family Code, unless the 



 
			
abortion is necessary due to a medical emergency, as defined by 



 
			
Section 171.002, Health and Safety Code;



 
			
             (20)  otherwise performs an abortion on an 



 
			
unemancipated minor in violation of Chapter 33, Family Code;



 
			
             (21)  performs or induces or attempts to perform or 



 
			
induce an abortion in violation of Subchapter C, F, or G, Chapter 



 
			
171, Health and Safety Code;



 
			
             (22)  in complying with the procedures outlined in 



 
			
Sections 166.045 and 166.046, Health and Safety Code, wilfully 



 
			
fails to make a reasonable effort to transfer a patient to a 



 
			
physician who is willing to comply with a directive; [or]



 
			
             (23)  performs or delegates to another individual the 



 
			
performance of a pelvic examination on an anesthetized or 



 
			
unconscious patient in violation of Section 167A.002, Health and 



 
			
Safety Code; or



 
			
             (24)  performs a gender transitioning or gender 



 
			
reassignment procedure or treatment in violation of Section 



 
			
161.702, Health and Safety Code.



 
			
       SECTION 5.  Subchapter B, Chapter 164, Occupations Code, is 



 
			
amended by adding Section 164.0552 to read as follows:



 
			
       Sec. 164.0552.  PROHIBITED ACTS REGARDING GENDER 



 
			
TRANSITIONING OR GENDER REASSIGNMENT PROCEDURES AND TREATMENTS ON 



 
			
CERTAIN CHILDREN.  (a)  The board shall revoke the license or other 



 
			
authorization to practice medicine of a physician who violates 



 
			
Section 161.702, Health and Safety Code.  The board shall refuse to 



 
			
admit to examination or refuse to issue a license or renewal license 



 
			
to a person who violates that section.



 
			
       (b)  The sanctions provided by Subsection (a) are in addition 



 
			
to any other grounds for revocation of a license or other 



 
			
authorization to practice medicine or for refusal to admit persons 



 
			
to examination under this subtitle or to issue a license or renew a 



 
			
license to practice medicine under this subtitle.



 
			
       SECTION 6.  Section 164.052, Occupations Code, as amended by 



 
			
this Act, and Section 164.0552, Occupations Code, as added by this 



 
			
Act, apply only to conduct that occurs on or after the effective 



 
			
date of this Act.  Conduct that occurs before the effective date of 



 
			
this Act is governed by the law in effect on the date the conduct 



 
			
occurred, and the former law is continued in effect for that 



 
			
purpose.



 
			
       SECTION 7.  If before implementing any provision of this Act 



 
			
a state agency determines that a waiver or authorization from a 



 
			
federal agency is necessary for implementation of that provision, 



 
			
the agency affected by the provision shall request the waiver or 



 
			
authorization and may delay implementing that provision until the 



 
			
waiver or authorization is granted.



 
			
       SECTION 8.  This Act takes effect December 1, 2023.








2023-2024 Bill 3611 Text of Previous Version (Jan. 11, 2023) - South Carolina Legislature Online
 

South Carolina General Assembly125th Session, 2023-2024Bill 3611Indicates Matter StrickenIndicates New Matter(Text matches printed bills. Document has been reformatted to meet World Wide Web specifications.)








A bill

TO AMEND THE SOUTH CAROLINA CODE OF LAWS BY ENACTING THE "live and let live ACT"; BY ADDING article 2 to chapter 32 of TITLE 1 SO AS TO PROHIBIT THE STATE GOVERNMENT FROM DISCRIMINATING against certain individuals and organizations based on their beliefs regarding marriage and a person's sex; and for other purposes.

Be it enacted by the General Assembly of the State of South Carolina:

SECTION 1.   This act may be cited as the "Live and Let Live Act".

SECTION 2.    The General Assembly hereby finds:

(1) Leading legal scholars concur that conflicts between same-sex marriage, gender identity ideology, and religious liberty are real and should be addressed through legislation.

(2) After the legalization of same-sex marriage, religious adoption and foster-care agencies in New York, Michigan, Pennsylvania, Massachusetts, Illinois, and the District of Columbia were forced to close or are now facing closure because of their sincerely held religious beliefs about marriage. Also, a religious educational institution in Massachusetts was threatened by the government with loss of its accreditation because of its sincerely held religious beliefs about marriage. And small family-owned wedding businesses in Colorado, Washington, Oregon, Idaho and elsewhere have endured fines or financial penalties or been forced to close because they operated in a manner consistent with their sincerely held religious beliefs about marriage.

(3) Citizens of the State hold a wide range of reasonable views on the issue of same-sex marriage and the nature of male and female, and maintaining the state's commitment to religious freedom when faced with these good-faith differences of opinion is vital.

(4) Our nation has a long and honorable history of respecting and accommodating the religious freedom rights of its people, dating from before the American Revolution to the present. For example, laws have protected the right of Quakers and other pacifists to serve the nation as noncombatants in times of war, the right of Jews and other Sabbath observers to dedicate their time to God and family instead of work on their Sabbath, and the right of religious organizations to provide charitable services to the public in a manner consistent with their beliefs by hiring individuals who share the same beliefs.

(5) Protecting religious freedom from governmental intrusion is a state interest of the highest order. Legislation advances this interest by remedying, deterring, and preventing governmental interference with religious exercise in a way that complements the protections mandated by the state and federal constitutions. 

(6) Protecting the religious freedom of faith-based charities and educational institutions serves the state's compelling interest in providing essential social services to the poor and educational opportunities to the next generation. This is also consistent with the state's long tradition of cooperating with religious organizations when providing these critical services.

(7) The State adopted the South Carolina Religious Freedom Act in 1999, making clear that it is unlawful to substantially burden a person's exercise of religion, even if the burden results from a facially neutral rule of general applicability, unless that application of the burden to the person is both (a) in furtherance of a compelling governmental interest, and (b) the least restrictive means of furthering that compelling governmental interest.

(8) In a pluralistic society, in which people of good faith hold more than one view of marriage, it is possible for the government to recognize same-sex marriage and to prohibit employment discrimination based on sexual orientation or gender identity without forcing persons with sincerely held religious beliefs or moral convictions to conform.

SECTION 3.A.   Chapter 32, Title 1 of the S.C. Code is amended by adding:

   Article 2

   Live and Let Live

   Section 1-32-210.   For purposes of this article:
   (1)   "Adoption or foster care" or "adoption or foster-care service" means social services provided to or on behalf of children, including: 
      (a) assisting abused or neglected children;
      (b) teaching children and parents occupational, homemaking, or other domestic skills;
      (c) promoting foster parenting; 
      (d) providing foster homes, residential care, group homes, or temporary group shelters for children; 
      (e) recruiting foster parents; 
      (f) placing children in foster homes; 
      (g) licensing foster homes; 
      (h) promoting adoption or recruiting adoptive parents; 
      (i) assisting adoptions or supporting adoptive families; 
      (j) performing or assisting home studies; 
      (k) assisting kinship guardianships or kinship caregivers; 
      (l) providing family preservation services; 
      (m) providing family support services; and 
      (n) providing temporary family reunification services. 
   (2)   "Discriminatory action" means any action taken by the state government to:  
      (a) alter in any way the tax treatment of, or cause any tax, penalty, or payment to be assessed against, or to deny, delay, revoke, or otherwise make unavailable an exemption from taxation of any person referred to in Section 1-32-230;  
      (b) disallow, deny, or otherwise make unavailable a deduction for state tax purposes of any charitable contribution made to or by such person;  
      (c) withhold, reduce, exclude, terminate, materially alter the terms or conditions of, or otherwise make unavailable or deny any state grant, contract, subcontract, cooperative agreement, guarantee, loan, scholarship, or other similar benefit from or to such person;  
      (d) withhold, reduce, exclude, terminate, adversely alter the terms or conditions of, or otherwise make unavailable or deny any entitlement or benefit under a state benefit program from or to such person;
      (e) impose, levy, or assess a monetary fine, fee, penalty, damages award, or injunction; 
      (f) withhold, reduce, exclude, terminate, materially alter the terms or conditions of, or otherwise make unavailable or deny any license, certification, accreditation, custody award or agreement, diploma, grade, recognition, or other similar benefit, position, or status from or to any person; or 
      (g) refuse to hire or promote, force to resign, fire, demote, sanction, discipline, materially alter the terms or conditions of employment, or retaliate or take other adverse employment action against a person employed or commissioned by the state government. 
   (3)   "Person" means:
      (a) a natural person, in the person's individual capacity, regardless of religious affiliation or lack thereof, or in the person's capacity as a member, officer, owner, volunteer, employee, manager, religious leader, clergy, or minister of any entity described in this item; 
      (b) a religious organization; 
      (c) a sole proprietorship, partnership, trust, closely held corporation, or other closely held entity operating with a sincerely held religious belief or moral conviction described in Section 1-32-220; or 
      (d) a cooperative, venture, or enterprise comprised of two or more individuals or entities described in this item regardless of nonprofit or for-profit status. 
   (4)   "Religious organization" means:
      (a) a house of worship including, but not limited to, churches, synagogues, shrines, mosques, and temples; 
      (b) a religious group, corporation, association, school or educational institution, ministry, order, society, or similar entity, regardless of whether it is integrated or affiliated with a church or other house of worship; or 
      (c) an officer, owner, employee, manager, religious leader, clergy, or minister of an entity or organization described in this item. 
   (5)   "State benefit program" means any program administered or funded by the State, or by any agent on behalf of the State, providing cash, payments, grants, contracts, loans, or in-kind assistance. 
   (6)   "State government" means:
      (a) the State or a political subdivision of the State;
      (b) any agency of the State or of a political subdivision of the State, including a department, bureau, board, commission, council, court, or public institution of higher education;
      (c) any person acting under color of state law; and 
      (d) any private person suing under or attempting to enforce a law, rule, or regulation adopted by the State or a political subdivision of the State. 

   Section 1-32-220.   The sincerely held religious beliefs or moral convictions protected by this article are the belief or conviction:
   (1)   regarding the sex of the two individuals who may enter into a marriage; and
   (2)   that male (man) or female (woman) refer to an individual's immutable biological sex as objectively determined by anatomy and genetics by time of birth.

   Section 1-32-230.(A)   The state government shall not take any discriminatory action against a religious organization wholly or partially on the basis that such organization:
      (1) solemnizes or declines to solemnize any marriage, or provides or declines to provide services, accommodations, facilities, goods, or privileges for a purpose related to the solemnization, formation, celebration, or recognition of any marriage, based upon or in a manner consistent with a sincerely held religious belief or moral conviction described in Section 1-32-220;
      (2) makes any employment-related decision including, but not limited to, the decision whether or not to hire, terminate, or discipline an individual whose conduct or religious beliefs are inconsistent with those of the religious organization, based upon or in a manner consistent with a sincerely held religious belief or moral conviction described in Section 1-32-220; or
      (3) makes any decision concerning the sale, rental, occupancy of, or terms and conditions of occupying a dwelling or other housing under its control based upon or in a manner consistent with a sincerely held religious belief or moral conviction described in Section 1-32-220.
   (B)   The state government shall not take any discriminatory action against a person that advertises, provides, or facilitates adoption or foster care, wholly or partially on the basis that such organization has provided or declined to provide any adoption or foster-care service, or related service, based upon or in a manner consistent with a sincerely held religious belief or moral conviction described in Section 1-32-220.
   (C)   The state government shall not take any discriminatory action against a person who is granted  custody of a foster or adoptive child by the State, or who seeks custody of a foster or adoptive child from the State, wholly or partially on the basis that the person guides, instructs, or raises a child, or intends to guide, instruct, or raise a child, based upon or in a manner consistent with a sincerely held religious belief or moral conviction described in Section 1-32-220.
   (D)   The state government shall not take any discriminatory action against a person wholly or partially on the basis that the person has provided or declined to provide the following services, accommodations, facilities, goods, or privileges for a purpose related to the solemnization, formation, celebration, or recognition of any marriage, based upon or in a manner consistent with a sincerely held religious belief or moral conviction described in Section 1-32-220:
      (1)   photography, poetry, videography, disc-jockey services, wedding planning, printing, publishing, web design, graphic design, counseling, or similar marriage-related goods or services; or
      (2)   floral arrangements, dress making, cake or pastry artistry, assembly-hall or other wedding-venue rentals, limousine or other car-service rentals, jewelry sales and services, or similar marriage-related services, accommodations, facilities, or goods.
   (E)   The state government shall not take any discriminatory action against a person wholly or partially on the basis that the person establishes sex-specific standards or policies concerning employee or student dress or grooming, or concerning access to restrooms, spas, baths, showers, dressing rooms, locker rooms, overnight lodging, or other intimate facilities or settings, based upon or in a manner consistent with a sincerely held religious belief or moral conviction described in Section 1-32-220.
   (F)   The state government shall not take any discriminatory action against a state employee wholly or partially on the basis that such employee lawfully speaks or engages in expressive conduct based upon or in a manner consistent with a sincerely held religious belief or moral conviction described in Section 1-32-220, as provided in this subsection:
      (1)   if the employee's speech or expressive conduct occurs in the workplace and the speech or expressive conduct is consistent with the time, place, manner, and frequency of any other expression of a religious, political, or moral belief or conviction allowed; or
      (2)   if the employee's speech or expressive conduct occurs outside the workplace and the speech or expressive conduct is in the employee's personal capacity and outside the course of performing work duties.
   (G)(1)   Any person employed or acting on behalf of the state government who has authority to authorize or license marriages pursuant to Article 3, Chapter 1, Title 20, may seek recusal from authorizing or licensing lawful marriages based upon or in a manner consistent with a sincerely held religious belief or moral conviction described in Section 1-32-220. Any person making such recusal shall provide prior written notice to the probate judge or clerk of court, as applicable, and the state government shall not take any discriminatory action against that person wholly or partially on the basis of such recusal. The probate judge or clerk of court, as applicable shall take all necessary steps to ensure that the authorization and licensing of any legally valid marriage is not impeded or delayed as a result of any recusal.
      (2)   Any person employed or acting on behalf of the state government who has authority to perform or solemnize marriages pursuant to Section 20-1-20 may seek recusal from performing or solemnizing lawful marriages based upon or in a manner consistent with a sincerely held religious belief or moral conviction described in Section 1-32-220. Any person making such recusal shall provide prior written notice to the probate judge or clerk or court, as applicable, and the state government shall not take any discriminatory action against that person wholly or partially on the basis of such recusal. The probate judge or clerk of court, as applicable, shall take all necessary steps to ensure that the performance or solemnization of any legally valid marriage is not impeded or delayed as a result of any recusal.

   Section 1-32-240.   The state government shall consider accredited, licensed, or certified any person that would otherwise be accredited, licensed, or certified, respectively, for any purposes under state law but for a determination against such person wholly or partially on the basis that the person believes, speaks, or acts in accordance with a sincerely held religious belief or moral conviction described in Section 1-32-220.

   Section 1-32-250.(A)   A person may assert a violation of this article as a claim against the state government in any judicial or administrative proceeding or as a defense in any judicial or administrative proceeding without regard to whether the proceeding is brought by or in the name of the state government, any private person, or any other party.
   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, an action under this article may be commenced, and relief may be granted, in a court of the State without regard to whether the person commencing the action has sought or exhausted available administrative remedies.

   Section 1-32-260.(A)   Any person who successfully asserts a claim or defense under this article may recover:
      (1) declaratory relief;
      (2) injunctive relief to prevent or remedy a violation of this article or the effects of such a violation;
      (3) compensatory damages for pecuniary and nonpecuniary losses;
      (4) reasonable attorneys' fees and costs; and
      (5) any other appropriate relief.
   (B)   Notwithstanding subsection (A), only declaratory relief and injunctive relief shall be available against a private person not acting under color of state law upon a successful assertion of a defense under this article.

   Section 1-32-270.(A) Sovereign, governmental, and qualified immunities to suit and from liability are waived and abolished to the extent of liability created by Section 1-32-260, and a person may sue the state government, except state courts, for damages allowed by that section.
   (B) Notwithstanding subsection (A), this article does not waive or abolish sovereign immunity to suit and from liability under the Eleventh Amendment to the United States Constitution.

   Section 1-32-280.(A) This article shall be construed in favor of a broad protection of free exercise of religious beliefs and moral convictions, to the maximum extent permitted by the state and federal constitutions.
   (B)(1) The protection of free exercise of religious beliefs and moral convictions afforded by this article are in addition to the protections provided under federal law, state law, and the state and federal constitutions. 
      (2) Nothing in this article shall be construed to preempt or repeal any state or local law that is equally or more protective of free exercise of religious beliefs or moral convictions. 
      (3) Nothing in this article shall be construed to narrow the meaning or application of any state or local law protecting free exercise of religious beliefs or moral convictions. 
      (4) Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent the state government from providing, either directly or through an individual or entity not seeking protection under this article, any benefit or service authorized under state law.
   (C) This article applies to, and in cases of conflict supersedes, each statute of the State that impinges upon the free exercise of religious beliefs and moral convictions protected by this article, unless a conflicting statute is expressly made exempt from the application of this article. This article also applies to, and in cases of conflict supersedes, any ordinance, rule, regulation, order, opinion, decision, practice, or other exercise of the state government's authority that impinges upon the free exercise of religious beliefs and moral convictions protected by this article. 

   Section 1-32-290.   A person must bring an action to assert a claim under this article not later than two years after the date that the person knew or should have known that a discriminatory action was taken against that person.

B.    Sections 1-32-10 to 1-32-60 are redesignated and entitled Article 1, "South Carolina Religious Freedom Act", and Chapter 32, Title 1 is retitled Chapter 32, "Free Exercise of Religion".

SECTION 4.   The repeal or amendment by this act of any law, whether temporary or permanent or civil or criminal, does not affect pending actions, rights, duties, or liabilities founded thereon, or alter, discharge, release or extinguish any penalty, forfeiture, or liability incurred under the repealed or amended law, unless the repealed or amended provision shall so expressly provide.  After the effective date of this act, all laws repealed or amended by this act must be taken and treated as remaining in full force and effect for the purpose of sustaining any pending or vested right, civil action, special proceeding, criminal prosecution, or appeal existing as of the effective date of this act, and for the enforcement of rights, duties, penalties, forfeitures, and liabilities as they stood under the repealed or amended laws.

SECTION 5.   If any section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, clause, phrase, or word of this act is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid, such holding shall not affect the constitutionality or validity of the remaining portions of this act, the General Assembly hereby declaring that it would have passed this act, and each and every section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, clause, phrase, and word thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more other sections, subsections, paragraphs, subparagraphs, sentences, clauses, phrases, or words hereof may be declared to be unconstitutional, invalid, or otherwise ineffective.

SECTION 6.   This act takes effect upon approval by the Governor.
----XX----
This web page was last updated on January 11, 2023 at 11:11 AM





 



 


 

		By: Harrison
H.B. No. 776




 


 



 		
			

A BILL TO BE ENTITLED




 
			

AN ACT




 
			
relating to prohibited practices by physicians.



 
			
       BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF TEXAS:



 
			
       SECTION 1.  Section 164.052 (a), Occupations Code, is 



 
			
amended to read as follows:



 
			
       Sec. 164.052.  PROHIBITED PRACTICES BY PHYSICIAN OR LICENSE 



 
			
APPLICANT.  (a)  A physician or an applicant for a license to 



 
			
practice medicine commits a prohibited practice if that person:



 
			
             (1)  submits to the board a false or misleading 



 
			
statement, document, or certificate in an application for a 



 
			
license;



 
			
             (2)  presents to the board a license, certificate, or 



 
			
diploma that was illegally or fraudulently obtained;



 
			
             (3)  commits fraud or deception in taking or passing an 



 
			
examination;



 
			
             (4)  uses alcohol or drugs in an intemperate manner 



 
			
that, in the board's opinion, could endanger a patient's life;



 
			
             (5)  commits unprofessional or dishonorable conduct 



 
			
that is likely to deceive or defraud the public, as provided by 



 
			
Section 164.053, or injure the public;



 
			
             (6)  uses an advertising statement that is false, 



 
			
misleading, or deceptive;



 
			
             (7)  advertises professional superiority or the 



 
			
performance of professional service in a superior manner if that 



 
			
advertising is not readily subject to verification;



 
			
             (8)  purchases, sells, barters, or uses, or offers to 



 
			
purchase, sell, barter, or use, a medical degree, license, 



 
			
certificate, or diploma, or a transcript of a license, certificate, 



 
			
or diploma in or incident to an application to the board for a 



 
			
license to practice medicine;



 
			
             (9)  alters, with fraudulent intent, a medical license, 



 
			
certificate, or diploma, or a transcript of a medical license, 



 
			
certificate, or diploma;



 
			
             (10)  uses a medical license, certificate, or diploma, 



 
			
or a transcript of a medical license, certificate, or diploma that 



 
			
has been:



 
			
                   (A)  fraudulently purchased or issued;



 
			
                   (B)  counterfeited; or



 
			
                   (C)  materially altered;



 
			
             (11)  impersonates or acts as proxy for another person 



 
			
in an examination required by this subtitle for a medical license;



 
			
             (12)  engages in conduct that subverts or attempts to 



 
			
subvert an examination process required by this subtitle for a 



 
			
medical license;



 
			
             (13)  impersonates a physician or permits another to 



 
			
use the person's license or certificate to practice medicine in 



 
			
this state;



 
			
             (14)  directly or indirectly employs a person whose 



 
			
license to practice medicine has been suspended, canceled, or 



 
			
revoked;



 
			
             (15)  associates in the practice of medicine with a 



 
			
person:



 
			
                   (A)  whose license to practice medicine has been 



 
			
suspended, canceled, or revoked; or



 
			
                   (B)  who has been convicted of the unlawful 



 
			
practice of medicine in this state or elsewhere;



 
			
             (16)  performs or procures a criminal abortion, aids or 



 
			
abets in the procuring of a criminal abortion, attempts to perform 



 
			
or procure a criminal abortion, or attempts to aid or abet the 



 
			
performance or procurement of a criminal abortion;



 
			
             (17)  directly or indirectly aids or abets the practice 



 
			
of medicine by a person, partnership, association, or corporation 



 
			
that is not licensed to practice medicine by the board;



 
			
             (18)  performs an abortion on a woman who is pregnant 



 
			
with a viable unborn child during the third trimester of the 



 
			
pregnancy unless:



 
			
                   (A)  the abortion is necessary to prevent the 



 
			
death of the woman;



 
			
                   (B)  the viable unborn child has a severe, 



 
			
irreversible brain impairment; or



 
			
                   (C)  the woman is diagnosed with a significant 



 
			
likelihood of suffering imminent severe, irreversible brain damage 



 
			
or imminent severe, irreversible paralysis;



 
			
             (19)  performs an abortion on an unemancipated minor 



 
			
without the written consent of the child's parent, managing 



 
			
conservator, or legal guardian or without a court order, as 



 
			
provided by Section 33.003 or 33.004, Family Code, unless the 



 
			
abortion is necessary due to a medical emergency, as defined by 



 
			
Section 171.002, Health and Safety Code;



 
			
             (20)  otherwise performs an abortion on an 



 
			
unemancipated minor in violation of Chapter 33, Family Code;



 
			
             (21)  performs or induces or attempts to perform or 



 
			
induce an abortion in violation of Subchapter C, F, or G, Chapter 



 
			
171, Health and Safety Code;



 
			
             (22)  in complying with the procedures outlined in 



 
			
Sections 166.045 and 166.046, Health and Safety Code, wilfully 



 
			
fails to make a reasonable effort to transfer a patient to a 



 
			
physician who is willing to comply with a directive; or



 
			
             (23)  performs or delegates to another individual the 



 
			
performance of a pelvic examination on an anesthetized or 



 
			
unconscious patient in violation of Section 167A.002, Health and 



 
			
Safety Code.



 
			
             (24)  performs the following therapies and procedures 



 
			
for the  treatment of gender dysphoria in minors:



 
			
                               (a)  Sex reassignment surgeries, or 



 
			
any other surgical  procedures, that alter primary or secondary 



 
			
sexual  characteristics; or



 
			
                               (b)  Puberty blocking, hormone, and 



 
			
hormone antagonist  therapies, except minors being treated with 



 
			
puberty blocking,  hormone, or hormone antagonist therapies prior 



 
			
to the  effective date of this subsection may continue with such 



 
			
therapies.



 
			
       SECTION 2.  This Act takes effect immediately if it receives 



 
			
a vote of two-thirds of all the members elected to each house, as 



 
			
provided by Section 39, Article III, Texas Constitution. If this 



 
			
Act does not receive the vote necessary for immediate effect, this 



 
			
Act takes effect September 1, 2023.



<![endif]-->




HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES


H.B. NO.


508




THIRTY-SECOND LEGISLATURE, 2023


 




STATE OF HAWAII


 




 


 




 




 
 



A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
relating
to sex-specific student athletic teams.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 




     SECTION 1.
The legislature finds that it is both proper and healthy for a society to
maintain opportunities for female athletes to demonstrate their skill,
strength, and athletic abilities while also providing them with opportunities
to obtain recognition and accolades, college scholarships, and the numerous
other long-term benefits that result from success in athletic endeavors. 
     The
legislature also finds that in recent years, the question of transgender
athletes competing against biologically opposite genders has stirred
controversies across the nation, with male-to-female transgender athletes
winning events ranging from girls state high school championship titles, to a
womens NCAA 500-yard freestyle swimming event.
     The
legislature further finds there is a dire need to promote sex equality by
ensuring that female athletes have a designated space to compete against other
females. While it has become part of a national conversation, the legislature
finds that for this particular issue, the male and female designation is to
mean biological male and biological female, respectively. 
     The
purpose of this Act is to require the designation of separate sex-specific
athletic teams or sports. 
     SECTION 2.
Chapter 302A, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new section to be
properly designated and to read as follows:
     "§302A-  Sex-specific athletic teams. (a) There
is a requirement to designate separate sex-specific athletic teams or sports
within interscholastic, intercollegiate, intramural, and club athletic teams or
sports. These include sports teams sponsored by a public, primary or secondary
school, a public postsecondary institution, or any school or institution whose
students or teams compete against a public school or public postsecondary
institution. These teams shall be expressly designated as one of the following
based on biological sex:
     (1) Males,
men, or boys;
     (2)
Females, women, or girls; or 
     (3)
Coed or mixed. 
     (b) Athletic
teams or sports designated for females, women, or girls may not be open to
students of the male sex. 
     (c) A
dispute regarding a student's sex shall be resolved by the student's school or
institution by requesting that the student provide a health examination and
consent form or other statement signed by the student's personal health care
provider which must verify the student's biological sex. The health care
provider may verify the student's biological sex as part of a routine sports
physical examination by relying on only one or more of the following:
     (1) The
student's reproductive anatomy;
     (2) The
student's genetic makeup; or
     (3) The
student's normal endogenously produced testosterone levels.
     (d) The
State Board of Education shall adopt rules regarding the receipt and timely
resolution of disputes by schools and institutions consistent with this
subsection." 
     SECTION 3.
Chapter 302A, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new section to be
properly designated and to read as follows:
     "§302A-  Protection for educational institutions.
(a) A governmental entity, any licensing or accrediting organization, or any
athletic association or organization may not entertain a complaint, open an
investigation, or take any other adverse action against any school or public
postsecondary institution for maintaining separate interscholastic,
intercollegiate, intramural, or club athletic teams or sports for students of
the female sex."
     SECTION 4.
Chapter 302A, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new section to be
properly designated and to read as follows:
     "§302A-   Cause of action, civil remedies. (a)
Any student who is deprived of an athletic opportunity or suffers any direct or
indirect harm as a result of a violation of this section shall have a private
cause of action for injunctive relief, damages, and any other relief available
under law against the school or public postsecondary institution. 
     (b) Any
student who is subject to retaliation or other adverse action by a school,
postsecondary institution, or athletic association or organization as a result
of reporting a violation of this section to an employee or representative of
the school, institution, or athletic association or organization, or to any
state or federal agency with oversight of schools or public postsecondary
institutions in the state, shall have a private cause of action for injunctive
relief, damages, and any other relief available under law against the school,
institution, or athletic association or organization.
     (c) Any
school or public postsecondary institution that suffers any direct or indirect
harm as a result of a violation of this section shall have a private cause of
action for injunctive relief, damages, and any other relief available under law
against the governmental entity, licensing or accrediting organization, or
athletic association or organization. 
     (d) All
civil actions brought under this section must be initiated within two years
after the alleged harm occurred. Persons or organizations who prevail on a
claim brough under this section shall be entitled to monetary damages,
including for any psychological, emotional, or physical harm suffered,
reasonable attorney fees and costs, and any other appropriate relief."

     SECTION
5.  New statutory material is
underscored.
     SECTION 6.  This Act does not affect rights and duties
that matured, penalties that were incurred, and proceedings that were begun
before its effective date.
     SECTION 7.  If any provision of this Act, or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance, is held invalid, the
invalidity does not affect other provisions or applications of the Act that can
be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end
the provisions of this Act are severable.
     SECTION 8.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 



INTRODUCED BY:


_____________________________




 


 







 


 
Report Title:
Sex-specific
athletic teams; school sports. 
 
Description:
Creates
the requirement of school sports to designate sex-specific teams for the
purpose of gender equality. 
 
 
 
The summary description
of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is
not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.




 
88R425 JG-F


 


 

		By: Perry
S.B. No. 162




 


 



 		
			

A BILL TO BE ENTITLED




 
			

AN ACT




 
			
relating to the required inclusion of a person's sex on a birth 



 
			
certificate and prohibited change of sex on the birth certificate 



 
			
of certain minors.



 
			
       BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF TEXAS:



 
			
       SECTION 1.  Section 192.002, Health and Safety Code, is 



 
			
amended by adding Subsection (c-1) to read as follows:



 
			
       (c-1)  The form must include a space for recording the 



 
			
biological sex of a child as either male or female.



 
			
       SECTION 2.  Section 192.003, Health and Safety Code, is 



 
			
amended by adding Subsections (f) and (g) to read as follows:



 
			
       (f)  Subject to Subsection (g), a person required to file a 



 
			
birth certificate under this section shall ensure the biological 



 
			
sex of a child, as determined by the sex organs, chromosomes, or 



 
			
endogenous profile of the child, is listed in the appropriate space 



 
			
on the child's birth certificate. A person required to report a 



 
			
birth under this section shall report the child's biological sex to 



 
			
the local registrar, and the local registrar shall list the 



 
			
biological sex in the appropriate space on the birth certificate.



 
			
       (g)  A person is not required to list on the birth 



 
			
certificate or report to the local registrar the biological sex of a 



 
			
child whose biological sex is not determined at birth because the 



 
			
child, as determined by a physician, has atypical or ambiguous sex 



 
			
organs, chromosomes, or endogenous profile for either male or 



 
			
female.  The birth certificate may be amended under Section 192.011 



 
			
at any time after the child's sex is determined to complete the 



 
			
information on the certificate by including the child's determined 



 
			
sex.



 
			
       SECTION 3.  Section 192.011, Health and Safety Code, is 



 
			
amended by amending Subsection (b) and adding Subsection (d) to 



 
			
read as follows:



 
			
       (b)  Except as provided by Subsection (d), on [On] the 



 
			
request of the person or the person's legal representative, the 



 
			
state registrar, local registrar, or other person who issues birth 



 
			
certificates shall issue a birth certificate that incorporates the 



 
			
completed or corrected information instead of issuing a copy of the 



 
			
original or supplementary certificate with an amending certificate 



 
			
attached.



 
			
       (d)  The state registrar, local registrar, or other person 



 
			
who issues a birth certificate under this section may not issue, and 



 
			
a court may not order the issuance of, a birth certificate that 



 
			
incorporates the completed or corrected biological sex information 



 
			
for a minor unless:



 
			
             (1)  the certificate corrects a clerical error on the 



 
			
original birth certificate;



 
			
             (2)  the original birth certificate does not list the 



 
			
minor's biological sex as required by Section 192.003(f) and the 



 
			
certificate completes the information by listing the minor's 



 
			
biological sex; or



 
			
             (3)  for a minor who at birth had atypical or ambiguous 



 
			
sex organs, chromosomes, or endogenous profile for either male or 



 
			
female and whose sex is later determined, the certificate:



 
			
                   (A)  corrects the biological sex information 



 
			
listed as either male or female on an original birth certificate by 



 
			
listing the minor's determined sex as the other biological sex; or



 
			
                   (B)  completes the biological sex information not 



 
			
previously listed on an original birth certificate by listing the 



 
			
determined sex.



 
			
       SECTION 4.  As soon as practicable after the effective date 



 
			
of this Act, the executive commissioner of the Health and Human 



 
			
Services Commission shall adopt rules necessary to implement the 



 
			
changes in law made by this Act.



 
			
       SECTION 5.  This Act takes effect September 1, 2023.




ASSEMBLY, No. 4042 

STATE OF NEW JERSEY
220th LEGISLATURE
  
INTRODUCED MAY 16, 2022
 




 
Sponsored by:
Assemblyman  ERIK PETERSON
District 23 (Hunterdon, Somerset and Warren)
 
 
 
 
SYNOPSIS
     "Children Innocence Protection Act." 
 
CURRENT VERSION OF TEXT 
     As introduced.
   




An Act concerning sex education and the administration of
surveys in public schools, supplementing chapter 35 of Title 18A of the New
Jersey Statutes, and repealing P.L.2001, c.364 and P.L.2021, c.156.
 
     Be It
Enacted by the Senate and General Assembly of
the State of New Jersey:
 
     1.    This act shall be known
and may be cited as the "Children Innocence Protection Act."
 
     2.    The Legislature finds
and declares that parents and guardians have a fundamental right to make
decisions regarding the upbringing and control of their children.  It is
fitting and proper for the Legislature to affirm the absolute control of
parents and guardians to decide what their children are taught in school with
regard to sex and gender in school and to decide what personal information is
revealed about their children.
 
     3.    a.  Notwithstanding the
provisions of any law, rule, or regulation to the contrary, classroom
instruction by school district personnel or third parties on sex, sex acts,
abortion, birth control, sexual orientation, or gender identity shall not occur
in any manner in kindergarten through grade five in any school of a school
district.  
     b.    Notwithstanding the
provisions of any law, rule, or regulation to the contrary, classroom
instruction by school district personnel or third parties on sex, sex acts,
abortion, birth control, sexual orientation, or gender identity shall not occur
in any manner in grade six through 12 in any school of a school district,
unless prior to the classroom instruction occurring, the school district:
     (1) provides all parents and
guardians with written detailed information on the curriculum and subjects to
be taught;
     (2)   provides all parents and
guardians with an easily accessible electronic method to review lesson plans
and ask questions;
     (3)   receives the express
written consent of each parent or guardian of a student that will receive the
classroom instruction.  
     c.     The provisions of this
section shall not apply to any curriculum or classroom instruction concerning the
subjects of anatomy or biology, provided that the curriculum or classroom
instruction is intended for a course or portion of a course in science.
     d.    Any school district
personnel that teaches or discusses any topic in a classroom in violation of
the provisions of this section, or otherwise fails to comply with the
provisions of this section, shall be included as a party in any enforcement
action available pursuant to section 5 of this act.
 
     4.    a.  A school district
shall not administer to a student any academic or nonacademic survey,
assessment, analysis, or evaluation that reveals information about the student
or the student's family, unless the school district:
     (1)   notifies the student's
parent or guardian of its intent to administer a survey, assessment, analysis,
or evaluation, and provides a copy of the survey, assessment, analysis, or evaluation,
at least two weeks prior to its administration;
     (2)   includes as the first
item of the notification required pursuant to this subsection, in bold face
type, a statement explaining that a student's parent or guardian may decline
the administration of the survey, assessment, analysis, or evaluation and that
declining shall not in any way impact the student's academics or be used
against the student at the school; and
     (3)   receives prior written
informed consent from the student's parent or guardian to administer the
survey, assessment, analysis, or evaluation.
     b.    A school district shall
not engage, contract, or partner with any private for profit or nonprofit
entity for the purposes of administering to a student any academic or
nonacademic survey, assessment, analysis, or evaluation that reveals
information about the student or the student's family.
 
     5.    A parent or guardian
alleging that the school district or any personnel of the school district
knowingly, willfully, or negligently violated the provisions of this act may:
     a.     request the
Commissioner of Education to appoint a special administrative law judge to hear
the parent or guardian's concerns; the special administrative law judge shall
determine facts relating to the allegation, consider information provided by
the school district and the parent or guardian, and render a recommended
decision for resolution by the State Board of Education within 30 days after
receipt of the request by the parent or guardian; the State Board of Education
shall approve or reject the recommended decision at its next regularly
scheduled meeting that is no less than seven calendar days and no more than 30
calendar days after the date the recommended decision is transmitted to the
State Board of Education; or 
     b.    bring an action against
the school district to obtain a declaratory judgment that the school district
procedure or practice violates the provisions of this act and seek injunctive
relief.  A court may award damages and shall award reasonable attorney fees and
court costs to a parent or guardian who receives declaratory or injunctive
relief.
 
     6.    The following sections
are repealed:
     Section 1 of P.L.2001, c.364
(C.18A:36-34); and
     Section 1 of P.L.2021, c.156
(C.18A:36-34.1).
 
     7.    This act shall take
effect immediately.
STATEMENT
 
     This bill prohibits a school
district from teaching students about sex education under certain circumstances
and prohibits a school district from administering to a student any academic or
nonacademic survey, assessment, analysis, or evaluation which reveals
information concerning the student or the student's family, unless the school
district meets certain requirements.  
     The bill provides that classroom
instruction by school district personnel or third parties on sex, sex acts, abortion,
birth control, sexual orientation, or gender identity will not occur in any
manner in kindergarten through grade five in any school of a school district.  The
bill also provides that classroom instruction by school district personnel or
third parties on sex, sex acts, abortion, birth control, sexual orientation, or
gender identity will not occur in any manner in grade six through 12 in any
school of a school district, unless prior to the classroom instruction
occurring, the school district:
     (1) provides all parents and
guardians with written detailed information on the curriculum and subjects to
be taught;
     (2)   provides all parents and
guardians with an easily accessible electronic method to review lesson plans
and ask questions;
     (3)   receives the express
written consent of each parent or guardian of a student that will receive the
classroom instruction. 
     The provisions of the bill
will not apply to any curriculum or classroom instruction concerning the
subjects of anatomy or biology, provided that the curriculum or classroom
instruction is intended for a course or portion of a course in science.
     Under current law, a school
district may administer a survey to a student that reveals certain information
about the student, or the student's family, only if the district obtains the
prior written informed consent of the student's parent or guardian.  If the
district obtains prior written informed consent of the student's parent or
guardian, the law permits the district to administer a survey that reveals
information concerning political affiliations; mental and psychological
problems potentially embarrassing to the student or the student's family;
sexual behavior and attitudes; illegal, anti-social, self-incriminating and
demeaning behavior; critical appraisals of other individuals with whom a
respondent has a close family relationship; legally recognized privileged or
analogous relationships, such as those of lawyers, physicians, and ministers;
income; or social security number.  
     Additionally, current law
permits a school district to administer anonymous, voluntary surveys concerning
student health upon prior written notification to parents and guardians. 
Specifically, the law permits school districts to administer a survey
concerning the use of alcohol, tobacco, drugs, and vaping; sexual behavior and
attitudes; behaviors that may contribute to intentional or unintentional
injuries or violence; or physical activity and nutrition-related behaviors. 
These surveys concerning student health may be administered two weeks after
written notification is provided to parents and guardians.
     This bill repeals the
aforementioned sections of current law that permit school districts to
administer certain surveys, and expressly prohibits school districts from administering
any survey that reveals information about a student or a student's family,
unless the school district: (1) notifies the student's parent or guardian of
its intent to administer a survey, and provides a copy of the survey, two weeks
prior to its administration; (2) includes as the first item of the
notification, in bold face type, a statement explaining that a student's parent
or guardian may decline the administration of the survey, and that declining
the survey will not in any way impact the student's academics or be used
against the student at the school; and (3) receives prior written informed
consent from the student's parent or guardian.
     The bill also prohibits a
school district from engaging, contracting, or partnering with any private for
profit or nonprofit entity for the purposes of administering to a student any
academic or nonacademic survey, assessment, analysis, or evaluation that
reveals information about the student or the student's family.
     Under the bill, a parent or
guardian alleging that the school district or any personnel of the school
district knowingly, willfully, or negligently violated the provisions of the
bill may:
     (1)   request the Commissioner
of Education to appoint a special administrative law judge to hear the parent
or guardian's concerns; the special administrative law judge will determine
facts relating to the allegation, consider information provided by the school
district and the parent or guardian, and render a recommended decision for
resolution by the State Board of Education within 30 days after receipt of the
request by the parent or guardian; the State Board of Education will approve or
reject the recommended decision at its next regularly scheduled meeting that is
no less than seven calendar days and no more than 30 calendar days after the
date the recommended decision is transmitted to the State Board of Education;
or 
     (2)   bring an action against
the school district to obtain a declaratory judgment that the school district
procedure or practice violates the provisions of the bill and seek injunctive
relief.  A court may award damages and will award reasonable attorney fees and
court costs to a parent or guardian who receives declaratory or injunctive
relief.




 
88R9763 CXP-D


 


 

		By: Schaefer
H.B. No. 2722




 


 



 		
			

A BILL TO BE ENTITLED




 
			

AN ACT




 
			
relating to a public school policy regarding multi-occupancy 



 
			
bathrooms or changing facilities.



 
			
       BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF TEXAS:



 
			
       SECTION 1.  Subchapter A, Chapter 38, Education Code, is 



 
			
amended by adding Section 38.044 to read as follows:



 
			
       Sec. 38.044.  POLICY REGARDING MULTI-OCCUPANCY BATHROOM OR 



 
			
CHANGING FACILITY.  (a)  In this section, "multi-occupancy bathroom 



 
			
or changing facility" means a facility designed or designated for 



 
			
use by more than one person at a time, where a person may be in a 



 
			
state of undress in the presence of another person, regardless of 



 
			
whether the facility provides curtains or partial walls for 



 
			
privacy.  The term includes a restroom, locker room, changing room, 



 
			
or shower room.



 
			
       (b)  A school district shall ensure that any policy adopted 



 
			
by the district regarding multi-occupancy bathrooms or changing 



 
			
facilities protects:



 
			
             (1)  the health, safety, and welfare of students;



 
			
             (2)  the confidentiality of student educational 



 
			
information as required under state and federal law, including the 



 
			
Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act of 1974 (20 U.S.C. 



 
			
Section 1232g); and



 
			
             (3)  the privacy interests of all students and the 



 
			
students' parents.



 
			
       (c)  If a school district adopts a policy that allows for 



 
			
separation of multi-occupancy bathrooms or changing facilities 



 
			
according to a criterion other than a person's biological sex 



 
			
assigned at birth, the policy must:



 
			
             (1)  include:



 
			
                   (A)  a description of:



 
			
                         (i)  which multi-occupancy bathrooms or 



 
			
changing facilities are not separated by biological sex assigned at 



 
			
birth; and



 
			
                         (ii)  if a multi-occupancy bathroom or 



 
			
changing facility is not separated by biological sex assigned at 



 
			
birth, the method by which students will be supervised in that 



 
			
facility and the manner in which that method of supervision ensures 



 
			
the safety and privacy of students; and



 
			
                   (B)  accommodations or modifications for students 



 
			
who wish to use a multi-occupancy bathroom or changing facility 



 
			
separated by biological sex assigned at birth; and



 
			
             (2)  be:



 
			
                   (A)  posted on the district's Internet website; 



 
			
and



 
			
                   (B)  provided at the beginning of each school year 



 
			
by mail to each parent of a student enrolled in the district.



 
			
       (d)  The requirements under Subsection (c) do not apply to a 



 
			
faculty bathroom that is not accessible to students.



 
			
       SECTION 2.  This Act applies beginning with the 2023-2024 



 
			
school year.



 
			
       SECTION 3.  This Act takes effect immediately if it receives 



 
			
a vote of two-thirds of all the members elected to each house, as 



 
			
provided by Section 39, Article III, Texas Constitution.  If this 



 
			
Act does not receive the vote necessary for immediate effect, this 



 
			
Act takes effect September 1, 2023.








2023-2024 Bill 3728 Text of Previous Version (Jan. 18, 2023) - South Carolina Legislature Online
 

South Carolina General Assembly125th Session, 2023-2024Bill 3728Indicates Matter StrickenIndicates New Matter(Text matches printed bills. Document has been reformatted to meet World Wide Web specifications.)








A bill

to amend the South Carolina Code of Laws by enacting the "South Carolina Transparency and Integrity in Education Act"; BY ADDING ARTICLE 5 TO CHAPTER 29, TITLE 59 SO AS TO EXPRESS RELATED INTENTIONS OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY, TO PROVIDE NECESSARY DEFINITIONS, TO PROHIBIT CERTAIN CONCEPTS FROM BEING INCLUDED IN PUBLIC SCHOOL INSTRUCTION AND PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT, TO PROVIDE MEANS FOR ADDRESSING VIOLATIONS, AND TO PROVIDE PROCEDURES FOR PUBLIC REVIEW OF PUBLIC SCHOOL CURRICULUM AND INSTRUCTIONAL MATERIALS; and by amending Section 59-28-180, relating to PARENTAL EXPECTATIONS IN THE PARENTAL INVOLVEMENT IN THEIR CHILDREN'S EDUCATION ACT, so as to PROVIDE PARENTS ARE EXPECTED TO BE THE PRIMARY SOURCE OF THE EDUCATION OF THEIR CHILDREN REGARDING MORALS, ETHICS, AND CIVIC RESPONSIBILITY, AND TO PROVIDE A PARENTAL PLEDGE OF EXPECTATIONS MUST BE PROVIDED TO PARENTS AS PART OF THE REGISTRATION AND ENROLLMENT PROCESS.

Be it enacted by the General Assembly of the State of South Carolina:

SECTION 1.   This act may be cited as the "South Carolina Transparency and Integrity in Education Act".

SECTION 2.   Chapter 29, Title 59 of the S.C. Code is amended by adding:

   Article 5

   Academic Transparency and Integrity

   Section 59-29-600.   (A)   It is the intent of the General Assembly that:
      (1)   all students learn in a positive learning environment where they are made to feel welcomed, supported, and respected;
      (2)   high school students graduate having learned critical thinking skills and being college ready and career ready;
      (3)   teachers, faculty, and staff strive to provide the best educational opportunity possible to their students;
      (4)   the State Department of Education, State Board of Education, and Education Oversight Committee regularly review, revise, and publish statewide academic standards that are fair, thorough, and respectful of teachers and students;
      (5)   statewide academic standards, especially in social studies, remain well written to help ensure that complete histories of South Carolina and the United States are offered to students;
      (6)   administrators, teachers, parents, students, and the local community share the responsibility for helping students obtain the best education possible;
      (7)   ideological  and viewpoint biases should not be presented as fact to students who receive instruction in public school;
      (8)   parents and students can raise awareness and have their concerns about objectionable material heard and addressed whenever a topic is presented in a way that is biased toward one ideology;
      (9)   administrators, teachers, and parents work to remove ideological biases from the pre-Kindergarten to grade twelve school setting; and
      (10)   this State ultimately is seen as a model for comprehensive, fair, and factual instruction.
   (B)   The General Assembly further states its intent that:
      (1)   students:
         (a)   treat teachers, aides, faculty, staff, volunteers, and their fellow students with respect, dignity, and kindness; and
         (b)   strive to do their best as they grow and learn;
      (2)   parents:
         (a)   engage with their children's school to ensure that teachers and staff are supported; and
         (b)   strive to make certain that students come to school prepared to learn and act in a way that leads to a positive school environment;
      (3)   teachers:
         (a)   strive to educate all students in a way that makes them feel welcomed, encouraged, and appreciated;
         (b)   work closely with parents to ensure that students are given opportunities to grow and learn;
      (4)   principals and other administrators provide support and guidance to teachers and students, and the observation, mentoring, and training of teachers is a constant and ongoing activity;
      (5)   superintendents and district level staff ensure that schools are given the assistance and resources needed to assist in teaching and learning for both students and teachers;
      (6)   local school boards of trustees:
         (a)   be vested in, and aware of, district and school operations;
         (b)   function in an open and transparent manner to ensure that schools operate efficiently and effectively;
         (c)   seek and value input from teachers; and
         (d)   encourage greater parental engagement; and
      (7)   communities:
         (a)   support local schools; and
         (b)   foster environments that support students, parents, teachers, faculty, and staff.

   Section 59-29-610.   For purposes of this article:
   (1)   "LEA" means a local education agency, to include the sponsor of a public charter school pursuant to Section 59-40-40, and the:
      (a)   Governor's School for the Arts and Humanities;
      (b)   Governor's School for Agriculture at John de la Howe;
      (c)   Special School of Science and Mathematics, also referred to as the Governor's School for Science and Mathematics;
      (d)   Wil Lou Gray Opportunity School; and
      (e)   South Carolina School for the Deaf and the Blind.
   (2)   "Parent" means the biological parent, stepparent, legal custodian, or other person responsible for the welfare of a child in a parental capacity, excluding an individual whose parental relationship to the child has been legally terminated.

   Section 59-29-620.   (A)   The following prohibited concepts may not be included or promoted in a course of instruction, curriculum, assignment, instructional program, instructional material (including primary or supplemental materials, whether in print, digital, or online), surveys or questionnaires, or professional educator development or training, nor may a student, employee, or volunteer be compelled to affirm, accept, adopt, or adhere to such prohibited concepts:
      (1)   one race, sex, ethnicity, color, or national origin is inherently superior to another race, sex, ethnicity, color, or national origin;
      (2)   an individual, by virtue of the race, sex, ethnicity, religion, color, or national origin of the individual, inherently is privileged, racist, sexist, or oppressive, whether consciously or subconsciously;
      (3)   an individual should be discriminated against or receive adverse treatment because of the race, sex, ethnicity, religion, color, or national origin of the individual;
      (4)   the moral character of an individual is determined by the race, sex, ethnicity, religion, color, or national origin of the individual;
      (5)   an individual, by virtue of the race or sex of the individual, bears responsibility for actions committed in the past by other members of the same race, sex, ethnicity, religion, color, or national origin;
      (6)   meritocracy or traits such as a hard work ethic:
         (a)   are racist, sexist, belong to the principles of one religion; or
         (b)   were created by members of a particular race, sex, or religion to oppress members of another race, sex, ethnicity, color, national origin or religion; and
      (7)   fault, blame, or bias should be assigned to race, sex, ethnicity, religion, color, or national origin, or to members of a race, sex, ethnicity, religion, color, or national origin because of their race, sex, ethnicity, religion, color, or national origin.
   (B)   Library and media center material, both printed and electronically accessible, must be age appropriate and grade appropriate.
   (C)   A student, administrator, teacher, staff member, other school or district employee, or volunteer may not be required to engage in any form of mandatory gender or sexual diversity training or counseling unless it is prescribed as part of a corrective action plan pursuant to Section 59-29-630(J).
   (D)   Nothing in this section prohibits concepts as part of a course of instruction, in a curriculum or instructional program, or through the use of supplemental instructional materials if these concepts involve:
      (1)   the history of an ethnic group, as described in the South Carolina State Standards and instructional materials adopted pursuant to the South Carolina Code of Regulations 43-70 (Textbook Adoption);
      (2)   the fact-based discussion of controversial aspects of history; or
      (3)   the fact-based instruction on the historical oppression of a particular group of people based on race, ethnicity, class, nationality, religion, or geographic region.
   (E)   The department shall create and make accessible model lesson plans for LEAs to utilize in all grades and subject areas.

   Section 59-29-630.   The department shall create a complaint form, which LEAs shall prominently post on their website, for use when an individual files a complaint alleging violations of Section 59 29 620. At a minimum, the department must ensure the complaint form includes:
   (1)   the name and contact information of the complainant;
   (2)   the name of the school in which the alleged violation took place;
   (3)   a brief description of the prohibited concept at issue;
   (4)   a brief statement on why the concept at issue is a prohibited concept;
   (5)   the name of the individual alleged to have included or promoted the prohibited concept;
   (6)   the name of the individual who may have knowledge of the allegations;
   (7)   a list of documentation or materials supporting the complainant's allegations, including copies of such documentation where possible;
   (8)   the approximate date on which the prohibited concept was included or promoted; and
   (9)   location, either physical or virtual, of the printed or electronically available material.

   Section 59-29-640.   (A)(1)   Each LEA shall:
         (a)   provide a statement on its website announcing the rights of parents to review curriculum and other material under the Protection of Pupil Rights Amendment as contained in 20 U.S.C. Section 1232h;
         (b)   provide annual notice of Section 59-29-620 to staff, students, and parents;
         (c)   ensure compliance with Section 59-29-620 by investigating suspected violations and complaints alleging violations as provided in this article;
         (d)   post the complaint form provided by the department pursuant to Section 59-29-630 for filing a complaint to allege a violation of Section 59-29-620 on the website of the LEA;
         (e)   prohibit retaliation for filing a complaint or participating in an investigation;
         (f)   obtain written consent from a parent prior to the participation of a minor student in the investigative process, including consent for the minor to be interviewed;
         (g)   provide instructions for filing an appeal of the LEA determination with the department in a written determination to an eligible complainant; and
         (h)   before July 1, 2025, and each year thereafter, provide a report to the department containing a summary of the:
            (i)      number of complaints filed with a description of the nature of each complaint;
            (ii)   number of complaints closed;
            (iii)   number of complaints pending;
            (iv)   number of resolution agreements successfully executed;
            (v)   number of complaints substantiated; and
            (vi)   number of complaints not substantiated.
      (2)   Before the 2029-2030 School Year, an LEA shall compile and provide records of item (1)(a) through (f) that encompass the previous five school years in the annual report required in item (1)(h). The department shall provide a report summarizing the information of each district to the General Assembly before July 1, 2025, and each year thereafter.
   (B)   Before the 2024-2025 School Year, the department shall create, and each LEA shall adopt, a policy for procedures used to report and investigate an alleged violation of Section 59-29-620 with the LEA, which must include:
      (1)   instructions detailing how to file a complaint alleging a violation of Section 59-29-620 with the LEA;
      (2)   a requirement that the complainant be:
         (a)   a current student of the LEA in which the allegation arose;
         (b)   the parent of a current student of the LEA in which the allegation arose; or
         (c)   an employee of the LEA in which the allegation arose.
      (3)   A timeline for the investigation of an LEA by the department, including when a:
         (a)   complaint must be received;
         (b)   response must be provided; and
         (c)   decision must be rendered.
   (C)   An LEA shall work collaboratively with parents, teachers, and other employees to resolve concerns and complaints. At any point after a complaint is filed but before the LEA has issued a final written determination, the parties may reach an early resolution of an allegation through a resolution agreement, which shall include any agreed upon terms of the early resolution. An LEA is not required to complete its investigation or issue a final written determination once it has entered a resolution agreement with the complainant.
   (D)   The complainant or individual alleged to have violated Section 59-29-620 may file an appeal of the final written determination of an LEA with the State Board within fifteen calendar days after receiving the final written determination.
   (E)   Within ten calendar days after the appeal is filed with the State Board, it shall send written notification acknowledging receipt to all parties involved.
   (F)   The LEA may not take disciplinary or licensure action against an educator for a violation of Section 59-29-620 before the State Board sends a final written determination letter to all parties involved.
   (G)   As part of an investigation, the State Board may:
      (1)   request an investigative file from the LEA;
      (2)   interview a complainant, the individual alleged to have included or promoted the prohibited concept, or another individual considered necessary by the State Board; and
      (3)   request any new or additional relevant physical or electronic evidence from the LEA or any witness.
   (H)   Within forty calendar days after receiving an appeal, the State Board shall determine whether:
      (1)   allegations in the original complaint are substantiated; and
      (2)   the LEA knowingly violated Section 59-29-620. An LEA must be deemed to have knowingly violated Section 59-29-620 if the LEA:
         (a)   received a complaint alleging and became aware that a prohibited concept was included or promoted in a course of instruction, curriculum, instructional program, or supplemental instructional materials but failed to initiate an investigation or remedy a violation;
         (b)   initiated an investigation but failed to make a timely determination about whether an allegation was substantiated; or
         (c)   determined that the allegation was substantiated but failed to remedy the violation.
   (I)   The State Board shall issue a written determination letter to the complainant, the individual alleged to have included or promoted the prohibited concept, and the LEA from which the allegation arose. This determination letter is subject to the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act of 1974 (FERPA), 20 U.S.C. Section 1232g and any law of this State that relates to the privacy of student information.
   (J)   Pending  the issuance of a final order by the State Board in a proceeding pursuant to this section, no preliminary information gathered by the department concerning misconduct reasonably believed to constitute grounds for disciplinary action, including the name and certificate number of the certified educator, may be disclosed to any third party.
   (K)   If the State Board determines that the LEA knowingly violated Section 59-29-620, the:
      (1)   LEA shall enter a corrective action plan that:
         (a)   identifies specific acts or steps the LEA will take to resolve the noncompliance;
         (b)   specifies deadlines for the completion of the required acts or steps; and
         (c)   specifies dates for submission of reports and documentation to the State Board verifying implementation; and
      (2)   State Board shall:
         (a)   monitor the corrective action plan to ensure the LEA complies with the terms of the plan;
         (b)   provide written notice to the LEA of any deficiencies in implementation and request immediate and appropriate action to address those deficiencies;
         (c)   require additions to the corrective action plan to address the failure of the LEA to fully implement commitments in the original plan when necessary; and
         (d)   conclude the monitoring of the corrective action plan when the State Board determines that the LEA fully has implemented the terms of the plan by providing written notification to the LEA.
   (L)   If the State Board determines the LEA knowingly violated Section 59-29-620 or the LEA fails to adhere to the corrective action plans, the department may withhold up to five percent of a LEA's funds appropriated as part of the State Aid Classrooms.

   Section 59-29-650.   (A)   Beginning with the 2024-2025 School Year and each school year thereafter, each LEA prominently shall post information regarding curriculum and instructional materials on the school district website. The information must indicate the materials used by school, grade or course, and subject matter, and must include:
      (1)   a listing of the approved textbook for every course offered in the district;
      (2)   a link to statewide academic standards;
      (3)   relevant district policies concerning curriculum development and academic transparency; and
      (4)   a process for which parents may review and contest instructional materials and library and media center materials being used.
   (B)   At the start of each school year, an LEA shall communicate to parents how they may access the information and materials required in subsection (A).
   (C)   A school shall ensure that every course offered provides students and parents with a course syllabus that includes:
      (1)   an overview of instructional topics;
      (2)   classroom expectations;
      (3)   grading procedures;
      (4)   primary textbooks and instructional materials;
      (5)   teacher contact information;
      (6)   information on accessing the course Learning Management System; and
      (7)   the link to state standards, if available.
   (D)   Course syllabi must be distributed to students and families within the first five days of class and should remain accessible to families online throughout the school year.

   Section 59-29-660.   (A)   The State Superintendent of Education shall plan for a thirty-day public review of materials recommended by the instructional materials review panels before taking those recommendations to the State Board of Education. The public review sites must be geographically distributed around the State at as many state supported colleges and universities or, if necessary, other designated sites that agree to host the reviews. Public review sites must be advertised in each congressional district in the newspaper with the largest circulation figures for that district, on the website of the department, and on social media sites used by the department.
   (B)   The State Board shall hold a public hearing before adopting any textbook or instructional material for use in the schools of this State.

   Section 59-29-670.   A school may not accept teaching materials or technology which contains an application, link, or other access to pornographic or other prohibited materials. A school district that receives such materials must receive disciplinary action as stated in the complaint process.

SECTION 3.   Section 59-28-180 of the S.C. Code is amended to read:

   Section 59-28-180.   (A) Parent involvement influences student learning and academic performance;  therefore, parents are expected to:
   (1) uphold high expectations for academic achievement;
   (2) expect and communicate expectations for success;
   (3) recognize that parental involvement in middle and high school is equally as critical as in elementary school;
   (4) ensure attendance and punctuality;
   (5) attend parent-teacher conferences;
   (6) monitor and check homework;
   (7) communicate with the school and teachers;
   (8) build partnerships with teachers to promote successful school experiences;
   (9) attend, when possible, school events;
   (10) model desirable behaviors;
   (11) use encouraging words;
   (12) stimulate thought and curiosity;  and
   (13) show support for school expectations and efforts to increase student learning; and
   (14) be the primary source of their student's education regarding learning morals, ethics, and civic responsibility.
   (B)   During the annual school registration process or whenever a student is registered in a school, the school shall provide each parent who enrolls a child in the school a printed "Pledge of Parental Expectations" that the State Department of Education shall develop, in which a parent may affirmatively commit to meeting the expectations outlined in subsection (A). The school shall encourage parents to sign the pledge and emphasize its importance during any orientation or open house events.

SECTION 4.   This act takes effect upon approval of the Governor and is applicable beginning with the 2024-2025 School Year.
----XX----
This web page was last updated on January 18, 2023 at 02:49 PM








2023-2024 Bill 332 Text of Previous Version (Jan. 10, 2023) - South Carolina Legislature Online
 

South Carolina General Assembly125th Session, 2023-2024Bill 332Indicates Matter StrickenIndicates New Matter(Text matches printed bills. Document has been reformatted to meet World Wide Web specifications.)








A bill

TO AMEND THE SOUTH CAROLINA CODE OF LAWS BY AMENDING SECTION 20-1-330, RELATING TO ISSUANCE OF MARRIAGE LICENSE CERTIFICATES, SO AS TO PROVIDE FOR THE SIGNATURE OF THE BRIDE AND GROOM ON THE CERTIFICATE.

Be it enacted by the General Assembly of the State of South Carolina:

SECTION 1.   Section 20-1-330 of the S.C. Code is amended to read:

   Section 20-1-330.   The officer issuing marriage license certificates shall issue them in triplicate, all of which shall be delivered to either of the contracting parties and the parties to whom they are delivered shall in turn deliver them to the minister or officer who performs the wedding ceremony.  The minister or officer who performs the wedding ceremony shall fill them out as required by law and deliver one to the contracting parties, without additional charge, and the other two within fifteen days to the officer who issued the license certificates. The marriage license certificate must include on it the following line for the signature of the contracting parties:

Bride (full name):_________________________   Groom (full name):_______________________.

SECTION 2.   This act takes effect upon approval by the Governor.
----XX----
This web page was last updated on January 10, 2023 at 12:47 PM




HB 619-FN - AS INTRODUCED  2023 SESSION	23-0071	02/05 HOUSE BILL	619-FN AN ACT	prohibiting gender transition procedures for minors, relative to sex and gender in public schools, and relative to the definition of conversion therapy.  SPONSORS:	Rep. Roy, Rock. 31; Rep. Spillane, Rock. 2; Rep. McCarter, Belk. 8; Rep. Verville, Rock. 2; Rep. Notter, Hills. 12; Rep. Seidel, Hills. 29; Rep. A. Lekas, Hills. 38; Rep. Love, Rock. 13 COMMITTEE:	Health, Human Services and Elderly Affairs ----------------------------------------------------------------- ANALYSIS 	This bill prohibits gender transition care for minors under 18 years of age, prohibits teaching about gender identity in public schools and changes the definition of conversion therapy. - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -  Explanation:	Matter added to current law appears in bold italics.		Matter removed from current law appears [in brackets and struckthrough.]		Matter which is either (a) all new or (b) repealed and reenacted appears in regular type.	23-0071	02/05 STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE In the Year of Our Lord Two Thousand Twenty Three AN ACT	prohibiting gender transition procedures for minors, relative to sex and gender in public schools, and relative to the definition of conversion therapy.  Be it Enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives in General Court convened:  1  Title.  This act shall be known and may be cited as the "Protection Against Child Medical and Psychological Experimentation Act". 2  Legislative Findings.  The general court finds that:		I.  New Hampshire has a compelling government interest in protecting the health and safety of its citizens, especially vulnerable children;		II.(a)  Only a small percentage of the American population experiences distress at identifying with their biological sex. 			(b)  According to the American Psychiatric Association, “For natal adult males, prevalence ranges from 0.005 to 0.014 percent, and for natal females, from 0.002 to 0.003 percent.”;		III.  For the small percentage of children who are gender nonconforming or experience distress at identifying with their biological sex, studies consistently demonstrate that the majority come to identify with their biological sex in adolescence or adulthood, thereby rendering most physiological interventions unnecessary;		IV.  Furthermore, scientific studies show that individuals struggling with distress at identifying with their biological sex often have already experienced psychopathology, which indicates these individuals should be encouraged to seek mental health services to address comorbidities and underlying causes of their distress before undertaking any hormonal or surgical intervention;		V.  Even among people who have undergone inpatient gender reassignment procedures, suicide rates, psychiatric morbidities, and mortality rates remain markedly elevated above the background population;		VI.(a)  Some health care providers are prescribing puberty blocking drugs, such as gonadotropin-releasing hormone analogues, in order to delay the onset or progression of puberty in children who experience distress at identifying with their biological sex.			(b)  The prescribing of puberty-blocking drugs is being done despite the lack of any long-term longitudinal studies evaluating the risks and benefits of using these drugs for the treatment of such distress or gender transition;		VII.  Health care providers are also prescribing cross-sex hormones for children who experience distress at identifying with their biological sex, despite the fact that no randomized clinical trials have been conducted on the efficacy or safety of the use of cross-sex hormones in adults or children for the purpose of treating such distress or gender transition;		VIII.  The use of cross-sex hormones comes with serious known risks, such as:			(a)  For biological females:				(1)  Erythrocytosis, which is an increase in red blood cells;				(2)  Severe liver dysfunction;				(3)  Coronary artery disease, including heart attacks;				(4)  Cerebrovascular disease, including strokes;				(5)  Hypertension;				(6)  Increased risk of breast and uterine cancers; and 				(7)  Irreversible infertility; and			(b)  For biological males:				(1)  Thromboembolic disease, including blood clots;				(2)  Cholelithiasis, including gallstones;				(3)  Coronary artery disease, including heart attacks;				(4)  Macroprolactinoma, which is a tumor of the pituitary gland;				(5)  Cerebrovascular disease, including strokes;				(6)  Hypertriglyceridemia, which is an elevated level of triglycerides in the blood;				(7)  Breast cancer; and 				(8)  Irreversible infertility;		IX.  Genital and non-genital gender reassignment surgeries are generally not recommended for children, although evidence indicates referrals for children to have such surgeries are becoming more frequent;		X.(a)  Genital gender reassignment surgery includes several irreversible invasive procedures for males and females and involves the alteration of biologically healthy and functional body parts.			(b)  For biological males, surgery may involve:				(1)  Genital reconstruction including penectomy, which is the removal of the penis;				(2)  Orchiectomy, which is the removal of the testicles;				(3)  Vaginoplasty, which is the construction of a vagina-like structure, typically through a penile inversion procedure;				(4)  Clitoroplasty, which is the construction of a clitoris-like structure; and 				(5)  Vulvoplasty, which is the construction of a vulva-like structure.			(c)  For biological females, surgery may involve:				(1)  A hysterectomy or oophorectomy;				(2)  Reconstruction of the urethra;				(3)  Genital reconstruction including metoidioplasty or phalloplasty, which is the construction of a penis-like structure;				(4)  Vaginectomy, which is the removal of the vagina;				(5)  Scrotoplasty, which is the construction of a penis-like and scrotum-like structure; and 				(6)  Implantation of erection or testicular prostheses;		XI.  The complications, risks, and long-term care concerns associated with genital gender reassignment surgery for both males and females are numerous and complex;		XII.(a)  Non-genital gender reassignment surgery includes various invasive procedures for males and females and also involves the alteration or removal of biologically normal and functional body parts.			(b)  For biological males, this surgery may involve:				(1)  Augmentation mammoplasty; 				(2)  Facial feminization surgery;				(3)  Liposuction;				(4)  Lipofilling;				(5)  Voice surgery;				(6)  Thyroid cartilage reduction;				(7)  Gluteal augmentation;				(8)  Hair reconstruction; and 				(9)  Other aesthetic procedures. 			(c)  For biological females, this surgery may involve:				(1)  A subcutaneous mastectomy;				(2)  Voice surgery;				(3)  Liposuction;				(4)  Lipofilling;				(5)  Pectoral implants; and 				(6)  Other aesthetic procedures;		XIII.(a)  It is an accepted principle of economics and public policy that when a service or product is subsidized or reimbursed, demand for that service or product is increased.			(b)  Between 2015 and 2016, gender reassignment surgeries increased by nearly twenty percent in the United States;		XIV.  It is of grave concern to the general court that the medical community is allowing individuals who experience distress at identifying with their biological sex to be subjects of irreversible and drastic non-genital gender reassignment surgery and irreversible, permanently sterilizing genital gender reassignment surgery, despite the lack of studies showing that the benefits of such extreme interventions outweigh the risks; and		XV.  The risks of gender transition procedures far outweigh any benefit at this stage of clinical study on these procedures.  3  New Chapter; System of Gender Dysphoria Care for Minors.  Amend RSA by inserting after chapter 135-F the following new chapter:CHAPTER 135-GSYSTEM OF GENDER DYSPHORIA CARE FOR MINORS	135-G:1  Definitions.  In this chapter:		I.  "Biological sex” means the biological indication of male and female in the context of reproductive potential or capacity, such as sex chromosomes, naturally occurring sex hormones, gonads, and non-ambiguous internal and external genitalia present at birth, without regard to an individual’s psychological, chosen, or subjective experience of gender.		II.  “Cross-sex hormones” means:			(a)  Testosterone or other androgens given to biological females in amounts that are larger or more potent than would normally occur naturally in healthy biological sex females; and			(b)  Estrogen given to biological males in amounts that are larger or more potent than would normally occur naturally in healthy biological sex males.		III.  “Gender” means the psychological, behavioral, social, and cultural aspects of being male or female.		IV.  “Gender reassignment surgery” means any medical or surgical service that seeks to surgically alter or remove healthy physical or anatomical characteristics or features that are typical for the individual’s biological sex, in order to instill or create physiological or anatomical characteristics that resemble a sex different from the individual’s biological sex, including without limitation, genital or nongenital gender reassignment surgery performed for the purpose of assisting an individual with a gender transition.		V.  “Gender transition” means the process in which a person goes from identifying with and living as a gender that corresponds to his or her biological sex to identifying with and living as a gender different from his or her biological sex, and may involve social, legal, or physical changes.		VI.(a)  “Gender transition procedures” means any medical or surgical service, including without limitation physician's services, inpatient and outpatient hospital services, or prescribed drugs related to gender transition that seeks to:				(1)  Alter or remove physical or anatomical characteristics or features that are typical for the individual’s biological sex; or				(2)  Instill or create physiological or anatomical characteristics that resemble a sex different from the individual’s biological sex, including without limitation medical services that provide puberty blocking drugs, cross-sex hormones, or other mechanisms to promote the development of feminizing or masculinizing features in the opposite biological sex, or genital or non-genital gender reassignment surgery performed for the purpose of assisting an individual with a gender transition.			(b)  “Gender transition procedures” do not include:				(1)  Services to persons born with a medically verifiable disorder of sex development, including a person with external biological sex characteristics that are ambiguous, such as those born with 46 XX chromosomes with virilization, 46 XY chromosomes with undervirilization, or having both ovarian and testicular tissue;				(2)  Services provided when a physician has otherwise diagnosed a disorder of sexual development that the physician has determined through genetic or biochemical testing that the person does not have normal sex chromosome structure, sex steroid hormone production, or sex steroid hormone action;				(3)  The treatment of any infection, injury, disease, or disorder that has been caused by or exacerbated by the performance of gender transition procedures, whether or not the gender transition procedure was performed in accordance with state and federal law or whether not funding for the gender transition procedure is permissible under this chapter; or				(4)  Any procedure undertaken because the individual suffers from a physical disorder, physical injury, or physical illness that would, as certified by a physician, place the individual in imminent danger of death or impairment of major bodily function unless surgery is performed.		VII.  “Genital gender reassignment surgery” means a medical procedure performed for the purpose of assisting an individual with a gender transition, including without limitation:			(a)  Surgical procedures such as penectomy, orchiectomy, vaginoplasty, clitoroplasty, or vulvoplasty for biologically male patients or hysterectomy or ovariectomy for biologically female patients; 			(b)  Reconstruction of the fixed part of the urethra with or without a metoidioplasty; or			(c)  Phalloplasty, vaginectomy, scrotoplasty, or implantation of erection or testicular prostheses for biologically female patients.		VIII.  “Health care professional” a person who is licensed, certified, or otherwise authorized by the laws of this state to administer health care in the ordinary course of the practice of his or her profession.		IX.  “Non-genital gender reassignment surgery” means medical procedures performed for the purpose of assisting an individual with a gender transition including without limitation:			(a)  Surgical procedures for biologically male patients, such as augmentation mammoplasty, facial feminization surgery, liposuction, lipofilling, voice surgery, thyroid cartilage reduction, gluteal augmentation, hair reconstruction, or various aesthetic procedures; or 			(b)  Surgical procedures for biologically female patients, such as subcutaneous mastectomy, voice surgery, liposuction, lipofilling, pectoral implants, or various aesthetic procedures.		X.  “Physician” means a person who is licensed to practice medicine in this state.		XI.  “Puberty-blocking drugs” means gonadotropin-releasing hormone analogues or other synthetic drugs used in biological males to stop luteinizing hormone secretion and therefore testosterone secretion, or synthetic drugs used in biological females which stop the production of estrogens and progesterone, when used to delay or suppress pubertal development in children for the purpose of assisting an individual with a gender transition.		XII.  Public funds” means state, county, or local government monies, in addition to any department, agency, or instrumentality authorized or appropriated under state law or derived from any fund in which such moneys are deposited.	135-G:2  Prohibition of Gender Transition Care for Children and Young Adults. 		I.  A physician or other health care professional shall not provide gender transition procedures to any individual under 18 years of age.		II.  A physician or other health care professional shall not refer any individual under 18 years of age to any health care professional for gender transition procedures.		III.  A physician or other health care professional is not prohibited from providing any of the following procedures which are not gender transition procedures to an individual under 18 years of age:			(a)  Services to persons born with a medically verifiable disorder of sex development, including a person with external biological sex characteristics that are ambiguous, such as those born with 46 XX chromosomes with virilization, 46 XY chromosomes with undervirilization, or having both ovarian and testicular tissue;			(b)  Services provided when a physician has otherwise diagnosed a disorder of sexual development that the physician has determined through genetic or biochemical testing that the person does not have normal sex chromosome structure, sex steroid hormone production, or sex steroid hormone action;			(c)  The treatment of any infection, injury, disease, or disorder that has been caused by or exacerbated by the performance of gender transition procedures, whether or not the gender transition procedure was performed in accordance with state and federal law or whether not funding for the gender transition procedure is permissible under this chapter; or 			(d)  Any procedure undertaken because the individual suffers from a physical disorder, physical injury, or physical illness that would, as certified by a physician, place the individual in imminent danger of death or impairment of major bodily function unless surgery is performed.	135-G:3  Prohibition on Use of Public Funds for Gender Transition Care. 		I.  Public funds shall not be directly or indirectly used, granted, paid, or distributed to any entity, organization, or individual that provides gender transition procedures to an individual under 18 years of age.		II.  Health care services furnished in the following situations shall not include gender transition procedures to an individual under 18 years of age:			(a)  By or in a health care facility owned by the state or a county or local government; or			(b)  By a physician or other health care professional employed by state or a county or local government.		III.  The New Hampshire Medicaid program shall not reimburse or provide coverage for gender transition procedures to an individual under 18 years of age.	135-G:4  Enforcement.		I.  Any referral for or provision of gender transition procedures to an individual under 18 years of age is unprofessional conduct and is subject to discipline by the appropriate licensing entity or disciplinary review board with competent jurisdiction in this state.		II.  A person may assert an actual or threatened violation of this chapter as a claim or defense in a judicial or administrative proceeding and obtain compensatory damages, injunctive relief, declaratory relief, or any other appropriate relief.		III.(a)  A person shall bring a claim for a violation of this chapter no later than 2 years after the day the cause of action accrues.			(b)  An individual under 18 years of age may bring an action during their minority through a parent or next friend, and may bring an action in their own name upon reaching majority at any time from that point until 20 years after reaching the age of majority.		IV.  Notwithstanding any other provision of law, an action under this chapter may be commenced, and relief may be granted, in a judicial proceeding without regard to whether the person commencing the action has sought or exhausted available administrative remedies.		V.  In any action or proceeding to enforce a provision of this chapter, a prevailing party who establishes a violation of this chapter shall recover reasonable attorneys’ fees.		VI.(a)  The attorney general shall bring action to enforce compliance with this chapter. 			(b)  This chapter does not deny, impair, or otherwise affect any right or authority of the attorney general, the State of New Hampshire, or any agency, officer, or employee of the state, acting under any law other than this chapter, to institute or intervene in any proceeding.	135-G:5  Insurance Coverage.		I.  No insurer that issues or renews a policy for health insurance under RSA 415, health service corporation under RSA 420-A, or health maintenance organization under RSA 420-B shall include reimbursement for gender transition procedures for a person under 18 years of age.		II.  No insurer that issues or renews a policy for health insurance under RSA 415, health service corporation under RSA 420-A, or health maintenance organization under RSA 420-B shall be required to provide coverage for gender transition procedures. 4  Legislative Findings Relative to Sex and Gender in Public Schools.  The general court finds that:		I.  Parents are the primary educators of their children.		II.  Parents are solely responsible for teaching their children about matters of faith, morals, and matters relating to their sexuality.		III.  When parents choose to send their children to a public school, they do not waive their right to be the sole educator of their children about matters of faith, morals, and matters relating to their sexuality.		IV.  Parents are entitled to deference in these matters and should not be contradicted by the government.		V.  Modesty falls within the scope of faith, moral and sexuality teachings, and parents should expect their children to be safe to express their modesty while in a public school.		VI.  Forcing a student to share a restroom, locker/changing room or shower with a student of the opposite sex is a direct contradiction to the concept of modesty and is a clear government interference in a parent’s right to teach their children as their faith, or personal moral code allows.		VII.  Teaching a student that there are more than two genders infringes on a parent’s right to be the sole educator in matters of faith, morals and sexuality, as many religious faiths teach that there are but two genders; male and female.		VIII.  Teaching a student that they are free to choose their own gender, name, pronoun, or sexual orientation violates a parent’s right as sole educator related to matters of faith, morals and matters relating to sexuality and is a government violation of that right.		IX.  There is no credible scientific evidence that a person is anything other than the gender and biological sex that they are born with and any claim to the contrary is based upon subjective, psychological, individual feelings.  This area of human study is controversial and far from settled science.  As such, teachings related to this complex and controversial concept are inappropriate for a pre-k through 12 public school setting.		X.  Biological males are physically different than biological females.  Males generally, are physically stronger and as such, any physical competition between biological males and biological females is fundamentally unfair.  Furthermore, such competition can result in physical injury to the female participant if contact is involved.  Allowing biological males to participate in female sports is both dangerous and unfair to female athletes.  This diminishes female achievement, sets back women’s rights and limits future collegiate scholarship opportunity and denies them the recognition they are due for their hard work in their sport of choice that is reserved to female athletes. 5  New Subdivision; Pupils; Sex and Gender in Public Schools.  Amend RSA 193 by inserting after section 40 the following new subdivision:Sex and Gender in Public Schools	193:41  Sex and Gender in Public Schools. 		I.  All public schools in kindergarten through grade 12 in New Hampshire shall refer to children by the name and gender that they are enrolled as.  This shall apply to all verbal and written communications, records, or in any other way that the students may be referenced.  Schools shall not allow the teaching of different pronouns other than those in common use in the English language when referring to the male or female.  School staff shall use the appropriate pronoun for student’s gender as listed in the enrollment by their parents.  Educators in grades kindergarten through 8, are prohibited from teaching that gender is a choice, optional or fluid and that there are more than 2 genders:  male and female.  Educators in grades 9 through 12 are prohibited from teaching that gender is a choice, optional or fluid and that there are more than 2 genders: male and female, except as a part of an approved psychology course setting where the educator is a licensed child psychologist, and they may only teach that there may be more than 2 genders in the context of teaching about the mental health condition known as gender dysphoria.  Prior to any lesson, class or assignment that proposes there are more than the male and female genders, the school shall obtain written permission from the parents.  The permission notice shall explain in detail the contents of the lesson, class or assignment.  Parents shall have the right to opt their child out of such lesson, class or assignment, and students themselves may choose not to participate if the subject matter makes them uncomfortable.  Any student’s failure to participate shall not be used in calculating their grades.  No grade or incomplete status shall be noted in the student’s records for failure to participate in such lesson, class or assignment. 		II.  In any New Hampshire public school that offers regular or extracurricular activities that are separated by gender or sex (male or female), any student participating shall only be allowed to participate in the group that corresponds to their biological sex as listed at their time of birth.  No student shall be discriminated against by not being allowed to participate in such an activity based on their personally identifying as a gender other than that identified at their time of birth but they shall nonetheless only participate in the activity that corresponds to their biological sex at their time of birth.		III.  School restrooms shall be separated by sex (male and female), and students may only use the restroom that corresponds to their biological sex as listed on their birth certificate. 		IV.(a)  Anyone violating a provision of this subdivision shall be considered to have violated the terms of their licensure and shall be subject to discipline by their licensing authority up to and including the revocation of their license.  This shall also be considered grounds for immediate termination from employment for cause, any union or employment contract notwithstanding.			(b)  Any student or parent aggrieved by a violation of this section may bring a cause of action in court and may be granted actual damages as well as legal fees.			(c)  The attorney general, upon referral by the department of education, a parent or student, shall bring any necessary action to enjoin any ongoing violation of this section and defend any actions brought under this section. 6  Definition; Conversion Therapy.  Amend RSA 332-L:1 to read as follows:	332-L:1  Definition.  In this chapter, "conversion therapy" means practices or treatments that seek to change an individual's sexual orientation or gender identity against their clearly expressed will, including further efforts against their will to change behaviors or gender expressions or to eliminate or reduce sexual or romantic attractions or feelings toward individuals of the same gender.  Conversion therapy shall not include counseling of a child enrolled in therapy at the request of their parent for the evaluation of, and treatment for, gender dysphoria, or that provides assistance to a person undergoing therapy for gender dysphoria and who, after reaching the age of 18, wishes to discuss gender transition from or to their biological gender, or counseling that provides a person over the age of 18 acceptance, support, and understanding of a person or facilitates a person's coping, social support, and identity exploration and development, including sexual-orientation-neutral interventions to prevent or address unlawful conduct or unsafe sexual practices, as long as such counseling does not seek to change an individual's sexual orientation or gender identity against their clearly expressed will. 	7  Effective Date.  This act shall take effect January 1, 2024. 											LBA											23-0071											1/10/23 HB 619-FN- FISCAL NOTEAS INTRODUCED AN ACT	prohibiting gender transition procedures for minors, relative to sex and gender in public schools, and relative to the definition of conversion therapy.  FISCAL IMPACT:      [ X ] State              [    ] County               [    ] Local              [    ] None

  

 

 Estimated Increase / (Decrease)

STATE:FY 2023FY 2024FY 2025FY 2026

   Appropriation$0$0$0$0

   Revenue$0$0$0$0

   Expenditures$0IndeterminableIndeterminableIndeterminable

Funding Source:  [ X ] General            [    ] Education            [    ] Highway           [    ] Other 

 The Legislative Budget Assistant Office is awaiting information from the Department of Justice.  The Department was contacted for a fiscal note worksheet on January 6, 2023. METHODOLOGY:This bill prohibits gender transition procedures for individuals under the age of 18 and prohibits the use of funds for these procedures. The Department of Health and Human Services anticipates a reduction in Medicaid funds as a result of the services, therapies, and medications that would no longer be performed or offered.  However, the Department also anticipates that the bill may result in an "undefined level of risk" of disallowance of federal matching funds under Medicaid, as federal law and regulations are currently unsettled on the matter of whether states may prohibit public funds from being used for gender transitions and related treatments.    The Judicial Branch notes that violations of the proposed new chapter would be subject to civil proceedings in court. In addition, the bill creates a new subdivision in RSA 193 relative to sex and gender in public schools, and would entitle the attorney general to seek an action in court to enjoin any ongoing violation of the section.  The Branch is unable to determine the number of new cases that may be brought as a result of the bill. The Department of Education states there is no anticipated costs to local school districts as a result of the bill. AGENCIES CONTACTED:Judicial Branch, and Departments of Health and Human Services, Education, and Justice 

MISSISSIPPI LEGISLATURE
2023 Regular Session
To: Judiciary, Division A; Education
By: Senator(s) Hill
Senate Bill 2076
AN ACT TO ENACT THE TITLE IX PRESERVATION ACT; TO PROVIDE INTERPRETATION
AND CLARIFICATION OF CERTAIN TERMS RELATING TO TITLE IX OF THE FEDERAL CODE; TO
STATE LEGISLATIVE INTENT; TO CLARIFY TERMS FOR THE PURPOSES OF STATE LAW; TO
PROVIDE THAT POLICIES AND LAWS THAT DISTINGUISH BETWEEN THE SEXES ARE SUBJECT
TO INTERMEDIATE CONSTITUTIONAL SCRUTINY; TO REQUIRE THE STATE OR A LOCAL
GOVERNMENTAL ENTITY TO DISAGGREGATE THE DATA OF INDIVIDUALS BY SEX BASED ON THE
BIOLOGICAL SEX OF INDIVIDUALS AT BIRTH WHEN THE STATE OR LOCAL GOVERNMENTAL
ENTITY GATHERS THE DATA OF INDIVIDUALS THAT IS DISAGGREGATED BY SEX; AND FOR
RELATED PURPOSES.
     BE IT ENACTED BY THE
LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF MISSISSIPPI:
     SECTION 1.  This
act shall be known and may be cited as "The Title IX Preservation Act."
     SECTION 2.  The
Legislature finds and declares that:
          (a)  Males and females
possess unique and immutable biological differences that manifest prior to
birth and increase with age and puberty;
          (b)  Biological
differences between the sexes mean that only females can get pregnant, give
birth and breastfeed children;
          (c)  Biological
differences between the sexes mean that males are, on average, larger in size
and possess greater body strength than females;
          (d)  Whereas biological
differences between the sexes can expose females to greater harm than males
from specific forms of violence, including sexual violence;
          (e)  Females have historically
suffered from discrimination in education, athletics and employment;
          (f)  Females have achieved
inspirational and significant accomplishments in education, athletics and
employment;
     Biological differences between
the sexes are enduring and may, in some circumstances, warrant the creation of separate
social, educational, athletic or other spaces in order to ensure safety and/or to
allow members of each sex to succeed and thrive;
          (g)  When it comes to sex:
               (i)  "Equal"
does not mean "same" or "identical"; and
               (ii)  Separate is not
inherently unequal; and
          (h)  Recent misguided
court rulings and policy initiatives relating to the definition of "sex"
have led to the endangerment of single-sex spaces and resources dedicated to
women, thereby necessitating clarification of certain terms.
     SECTION 3.  For
the purposes of State law:
          (a)  The "sex"
of an individual means his or her biological sex (either male or female) at
birth.
          (b)  The terms "woman"
and "girl" refer to human females.
          (c)  The terms "man"
and "boy" refer to human males.
          (d)  The word "mother"
refers to a parent of the female sex.
          (e)  The word "father"
refers to a parent of the male sex.
     SECTION 4.  (1)
 There are important reasons to distinguish between the sexes with respect to
athletics, prisons, domestic violence shelters, restrooms, and with respect to
other areas, particularly where biology, safety and privacy are implicated.
     (2)  Policies and laws that
distinguish between the sexes are subject to intermediate constitutional
scrutiny and permitted when they serve an important governmental objective and
are substantially related to achieving that objective.
     SECTION 5.  When
the State or a local governmental entity gathers data of individuals that is disaggregated
by sex, the state or local governmental entity shall disaggregate the data of individuals
by sex based on the biological sex of individuals at birth.
     SECTION 6.  Any
person who suffers any direct or indirect harm as a result of a violation of this
act shall have a private cause of action for injunctive relief, damages and any
other relief available under law against the state or its political subdivision
causing the harm.
     SECTION 7.  This act
shall take effect and be in force from and after July 1, 2023.


<![endif]-->




HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES


H.B. NO.


509




THIRTY-SECOND LEGISLATURE, 2023


 




STATE OF HAWAII


 




 


 




 




 
 



A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
relating
to parental rights in education.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 




     SECTION
1.  Chapter
302A, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new section to be
properly designated and to read as follows:
     "§302A-  Student welfare.     (a) The board must adopt
procedures for notifying a student's parent if there is a change in the
student's services or monitoring related to the student's mental, emotional, or
physical health or well-being and the school's ability to provide a safe and
supportive learning environment for the student. The procedures must reinforce
the fundamental right of parents to make decisions regarding the upbringing and
control of their children by requiring school personnel to encourage a student
to discuss issues relating to his or her well-being with his or her parent or
to facilitate discussion of the issue with the parent. The procedures may not
prohibit parents from accessing any of their student's education and health
records created, maintained, or used by the department. 
(b) The
board may not adopt procedures or student support forms that prohibit school
personnel from notifying a parent about his or her student's mental, emotional,
or physical health or well-being, or a change in related services or
monitoring, or that encourage or have the effect of encouraging a student to
withhold from a parent such information. School personnel may not discourage or
prohibit parental notification of and involvement in critical decisions
affecting a student's mental, emotional, or physical health or well-being. This
subparagraph does not prohibit the department  from adopting procedures
that permit school personnel to withhold such information from a parent if a
reasonably prudent person would believe that disclosure would result in abuse,
abandonment, or neglect. 
(c)
Classroom instruction by school personnel or third parties on sexual
orientation or gender identity may not occur in kindergarten through grade
three or in a manner that is not age appropriate or developmentally appropriate
for students in accordance with state standards. 
(d)
Student support services training developed or provided by the department to
school personnel must adhere to student services guidelines, standards, and
frameworks established by the department.
(e)  At the beginning of the school year, the
department shall notify parents of each healthcare service offered at their
student's school and the option to withhold consent or decline any specific
service. Parental consent to a health care service does not waive the parent's
right to access his or her student's educational or health records or to be
notified about a change in his or her student's services or monitoring as
provided by this subsection. 
(f)  Before administering a student well-being
questionnaire or health screening form to a student in kindergarten through
grade three, the department must provide the questionnaire or health screening
form to the parent and obtain the permission of the parent. 
(g)  The board shall adopt procedures for a parent
to notify the principal, or his or her designee, regarding concerns under this subsection
at his or her student's school and the process for resolving those concerns
within seven calendar days after notification by the parent. The procedures
must require that within thirty days after notification by the parent that the
concern remains unresolved, the department must either resolve the concern or
provide a statement of the reasons for not resolving the concern. 
(1)  If a concern is not resolved by the department,
a parent may: 
(A)  Request the superintendent to appoint a
special magistrate who is a member of the Hawaii bar (?)  in good standing
and who has at least five years' experience in administrative law. The special
magistrate shall determine facts relating to the dispute over the department
procedure or practice, consider information provided by the department, and
render a recommended decision for resolution to the board within thirty days
after receipt of the request by the parent. The board must approve or reject
the recommended decision at its next regularly scheduled meeting that is more
than seven calendar days and no more than thirty days after the date the
recommended decision is transmitted. The costs of the special magistrate shall
be borne by the department. The board shall adopt rules, including forms,
necessary to implement this subparagraph.
(B)  Bring an action against
the department to obtain a declaratory judgment that the department procedure
or practice violates this subsection and seek injunctive relief. A court may
award damages and shall award reasonable attorney fees and court costs to a
parent who receives declaratory or injunctive relief.
(2)  The board shall adopt
policies to notify parents of the procedures required under this subsection.
(3)  Nothing contained in
this subsection shall be construed to abridge or alter rights of action or remedies
in equity already existing under the common law or general law.
     SECTION
2.  By June 30, 2024, the department shall review and update, as necessary, school
counseling frameworks and standards; educator practices and professional
conduct principles; and any other student services personnel guidelines,
standards, or frameworks in accordance with the requirements of this Act.
     SECTION
3.  This Act shall take effect July 1,
2023. 



INTRODUCED BY:


_____________________________




 


 








 
Report Title:
Parental
rights in education
 
Description:
Bans
instruction related to sexual orientation and gender identity in public
schools. Establishes new parental rights regarding health services and records.
Establishes the parental right to sue and receive damages if schools fail to
adhere to new provisions. 
 
 
 
The summary description
of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is
not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.



MISSISSIPPI LEGISLATURE
2023 Regular Session
To: Education
By: Senator(s) Hill
Senate Bill 2763
AN ACT TO ENACT THE "FAMILIES' RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
ACT"; TO PROVIDE THAT THE LIBERTY OF A PARENT TO DIRECT THE UPBRINGING,
EDUCATION, HEALTH CARE AND MENTAL HEALTH OF THAT PARENT'S CHILD SHALL BE A
FUNDAMENTAL RIGHT; TO PROVIDE THAT THE STATE, ANY POLITICAL SUBDIVISION OF THIS
STATE OR ANY OTHER GOVERNMENTAL ENTITY SHALL NOT SUBSTANTIALLY BURDEN THE
FUNDAMENTAL RIGHT OF A PARENT TO DIRECT THE UPBRINGING, EDUCATION, HEALTH CARE
AND MENTAL HEALTH OF THAT PARENT'S CHILD WITHOUT DEMONSTRATING THAT THE BURDEN
IS REQUIRED BY A COMPELLING GOVERNMENTAL INTEREST OF THE HIGHEST ORDER AS
APPLIED TO THE PARENT AND THE CHILD AND IS THE LEAST RESTRICTIVE MEANS OF
FURTHERING THAT COMPELLING GOVERNMENTAL INTEREST; TO PROVIDE SPECIFIC RIGHTS
AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF PARENTS; TO SET STANDARDS FOR THE EDUCATIONAL
INVOLVEMENT FOR PARENTS IN SCHOOL DISTRICTS; TO PROVIDE THAT A PERSON,
CORPORATION, ASSOCIATION, ORGANIZATION, STATE-SUPPORTED INSTITUTION OR
INDIVIDUAL EMPLOYED BY ANY OF THESE ENTITIES SHALL OBTAIN THE CONSENT OF A PARENT
OF A CHILD BEFORE TAKING ANY SPECIFIC MEDICAL CARE; TO PROVIDE A CAUSE OF
ACTION FOR ANY VIOLATION OF THE ACT; TO PROVIDE THAT PARENTS HAVE INALIENABLE
RIGHTS THAT ARE MORE COMPREHENSIVE THAN THOSE LISTED IN THIS ACT; AND FOR
RELATED PURPOSES.
     BE IT ENACTED BY THE
LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF MISSISSIPPI:
     SECTION 1.  Title.
 This Act shall be known and may be cited as the "Families' Rights and
Responsibilities Act."
     SECTION 2.  Definitions.
 For purposes of this act, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed
herein:
          (a)  "Child"
means an individual under the age of eighteen.
          (b)  "Parent"
means a biological parent of a child, an adoptive parent of a child, or an
individual who has been granted exclusive right and authority over the welfare
of a child under state law.
          (c)  "Substantial
burden" means any action that directly or indirectly constrains, inhibits,
curtails or denies the right of a parent to direct the upbringing, education,
health care and mental health of that parent's child or compels any action
contrary to the right of a parent to direct the upbringing, education, health
care and mental health of that parent's child.
This term shall include but is
not limited to, withholding benefits, assessing criminal, civil or administrative
penalties or damages, or exclusion from governmental programs.
     SECTION 3.  Parental
rights are fundamental.
     (1)  The liberty of a parent
to direct the upbringing, education, health care and mental health of that
parent's child shall be a fundamental right.
     (2)  This state, any
political subdivision of this state or any other governmental entity shall not
substantially burden the fundamental right of a parent to direct the
upbringing, education, health care and mental health of that parent's child
without demonstrating that the burden is required by a compelling governmental
interest of the highest order as applied to the
parent and the child and is the
least restrictive means of furthering that compelling governmental interest.
     SECTION 4.  Rights
and responsibilities.
     (1)  All parental rights shall
be exclusively reserved to a parent of a child without obstruction by or
interference from this state, any political subdivision of this state, any
other governmental entity or any other institution, including
without limitation, the following
rights and responsibilities:
          (a)  To direct the
education of the child, including the right to choose public, private,
religious or home schools, and the right to make reasonable choices within public
schools for the education of the child;
          (b)  To access and
review all school records relating to the child;
          (c)  To direct the
upbringing of the child;
          (d)  To direct the
moral or religious training of the child;
          (e)  To make and
consent in writing to all physical and mental healthcare decisions for the
child;
          (f)  To access and
review all medical records of the child;
          (g)  To consent in
writing before a biometric scan of the child is made, shared or stored;
          (h)  To consent in
writing before any record of the child's blood or deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA)
is created, stored or shared, unless authorized pursuant to a court order;
          (i)  To consent in
writing before any governmental entity makes a video or voice recording of the
child, unless the video or voice recording is made during or as a part of:
               (i)  A court
proceeding;
               (ii)  A law
enforcement investigation;
               (iii)  A forensic
interview in a criminal or Mississippi Department of Child Protection Services
investigation;
               (iv)  The security
or surveillance of buildings or grounds; or
               (v)  A photo
identification card;
          (j)  To be notified
promptly if an employee of this state, any political subdivision of this state,
any other governmental entity or any other institution suspects that abuse,
neglect or any criminal offense has been committed against the child by someone
other than a parent, unless the incident has first been reported to law
enforcement and notification of the
parent would impede a law
enforcement or Mississippi Department of Child Protection Services
investigation.
     (2)  This section does not
authorize or allow a parent to abuse or neglect a child as defined in Section 97-5-39.
 This section does not apply to a parental action or decision that would end
life.  This section does not prohibit a court from issuing an order that is
otherwise permitted by law.
     (3)  No employee of this
state, any political subdivision of this state or any other governmental
entity, except for law enforcement personnel, shall encourage or coerce a child
to withhold information from the child's parent.  Nor shall any such employee
withhold from a child's parent information that is relevant to the physical,
emotional or mental health of the child. Such conduct shall be grounds for
discipline of the employee, in addition to any other remedies provided to a
parent under this Act.
     SECTION 5.  Educational
Involvement.
     (1)  The board of education
of a school district, in consultation with parents, teachers and
administrators, shall develop and adopt a policy to promote the involvement of
parents of children enrolled in the schools within the school district,
including:
          (a)  A plan for parent
participation in the schools, which is designed to improve parent and teacher
cooperation in such areas as homework, attendance and discipline;
          (b)  Procedures by
which a parent may learn about the course of study for that parent's child and
review all educational and learning materials, including the source of any
supplemental educational materials;
          (c)  Procedures by
which a parent who objects to any specific instruction or presentation on the
basis that it is harmful may withdraw that parent's child from the instruction
or presentation.  Objection to a specific instruction or presentation on the
basis that it is harmful includes, but it is not limited to, objection to a
material or activity because it questions
beliefs or practices regarding
sex, morality or religion;
          (d)  Procedures to
notify a parent in advance and obtain the parent's written consent before the
parent's child attends any instruction or presentation containing sexual
educational content
or any instruction or
presentation that has the goal or purpose of
studying, exploring or informing
students about gender roles or
stereotypes, gender identity,
gender expression, sexual orientation or romantic or sexual relationships;
          (e)  Procedures by
which a parent may learn about the nature and purpose of clubs and
extracurricular activities that have been approved by the school and may
withdraw that parent's child from any club or extracurricular to which the
parent objects; and
          (f)  Procedures by
which a parent may learn about parental rights and responsibilities under the
laws of this state.
     (2)  The board of education
of a school district may adopt a policy to provide to parents the information
required by this section in an electronic form.
     (3)  A parent shall submit a
written or electronic request for information pursuant to this section to
either the school principal or the superintendent of the school district.  Within
ten (10) days of receiving the request for information, the school principal or
the superintendent shall either deliver the requested
information to the parent or
submit to the parent a written explanation of the reasons for the denial of the
requested information.  If the request for information is denied or the parent
does not receive the requested information within fifteen (15) days after
submitting the request for information, the
parent may submit a written
request for the information to the board of education of the school district,
which shall formally consider the request at the next scheduled public meeting
of the board if the request can be properly noticed on the agenda.  If the
request cannot be properly noticed on the agenda, the board of education shall
formally consider the request at the next subsequent public meeting of the
board.
     SECTION 6.  Medical
Care.
     (1)  Except as
otherwise provided by law or court order, a person, corporation, association,
organization, state-supported institution or individual employed by any of
these entities shall obtain the consent of a parent of a child before taking
any of the following actions:
          (a)  Procuring,
soliciting to perform, arranging for the performance of, providing a referral
for or performing surgical procedures upon a child;
          (b)  Procuring,
soliciting to perform, arranging for the performance of, providing a referral
for or performing a physical examination upon a child;
          (c)  Prescribing or
dispensing any medication or prescription drugs to a child; or
          (d)  Procuring,
soliciting to perform, arranging for the performance of, providing a referral
for or performing a mental health evaluation in a clinical or nonclinical
setting or mental health treatment on a child.
     (2)  If the parental consent
pursuant to Subsection (1) of this section is given through telemedicine, the
person or entity obtaining parental consent must verify the identity of the parent
at the site where the consent is given.
     (3)  The provisions of this
section shall not apply when it has been determined by a physician that:
          (a)  An emergency
exists; and
          (b)  Either of the
following conditions is true:
               (i)  It is
necessary to perform an activity listed in Subsection (1) of this section in
order to prevent death or imminent, irreparable physical injury to the child,
or
               (ii)  A parent of
the child cannot be located or contacted after a reasonably diligent effort.
     (4)  The provisions of this section
shall not apply to a performance of abortions upon minors, which shall be governed
by Sections 41-41-51 through 41-41-63.
     SECTION 7.  Cause of
Action.
     (1)  A parent may bring suit
for any violation of this Act and may raise the Act as a defense in any
judicial or administrative proceeding without regard to whether the proceeding
is brought by or in the name of the State government, any private person or any
other party.
     (2)  Notwithstanding any
other provision of law, an action under this Act may be commenced, and relief
may be granted, without regard to whether the person commencing the action has
sought or exhausted available administrative remedies.
     (3)  Any person who
successfully asserts a claim or defense under this Act may recover declaratory
relief, injunctive relief, compensatory damages, reasonable attorneys' fees and
costs and any other appropriate relief.
     (4)  Sovereign, governmental
and qualified immunities to suit and from liability are waived and abolished to
the extent of liability created by this Act.
     SECTION 8.  Rules of
Construction.
     (1)  Unless those rights
have been legally waived or legally terminated, parents have inalienable rights
that are more comprehensive than those listed in this section.  The protections
of the fundamental right of parents to direct the upbringing, education, health
care and mental health of their child afforded by this Act are in addition to
the protections provided under Federal law, State law, and the State and
Federal constitutions.
     (2)  This Act shall be
construed in favor of a broad protection of the fundamental right of parents to
direct the upbringing, education, health care and mental health of their child.
     (3)  Nothing in this Act
shall be construed to authorize any government to burden the fundamental right
of parents to direct the upbringing, education, health care and mental health
of their child.
     (4)  If a child has no
affirmative right of access to a particular medical treatment, then nothing in
this Act shall be construed to grant that child's parent an affirmative right
of access to that treatment on that child's behalf.
     SECTION 9.  This act
shall take effect and be in force from and after July 1, 2023.




MISSISSIPPI LEGISLATURE
2023 Regular Session
To: Public Health and Human Services
By: Representative Hobgood-Wilkes
House Bill 576
AN ACT TO BE KNOWN AS THE MISSISSIPPI HELP NOT HARM ACT; TO
CREATE NEW SECTION 11-77-1, MISSISSIPPI CODE OF 1972, TO DEFINE TERMS; TO
CREATE NEW SECTION 11-77-3, MISSISSIPPI CODE OF 1972, TO PROHIBIT ANY PERSON
FROM KNOWINGLY PERFORMING OR PROVIDING GENDER REASSIGNMENT SURGERY OR SERVICES
TO A MINOR; TO PROVIDE THAT ANY LICENSED MEDICAL PROFESSIONAL WHO PERFORMS OR
PROVIDES GENDER REASSIGNMENT SURGERY OR SERVICES TO A MINOR SHALL HAVE HIS OR HER
LICENSE REVOKED; TO PROVIDE A PRIVATE CAUSE OF ACTION AGAINST A PHYSICIAN,
OSTEOPATH, HOSPITAL, PRESCRIBING CAREGIVER, CLINIC AND ANY OTHER HEALTH CARE
FACILITY FOR INJURIES ARISING OUT OF THE COURSE OF MEDICAL, SURGICAL OR OTHER
PROFESSIONAL SERVICES RELATED TO THE PERFORMANCE OF GENDER REASSIGNMENT SURGERY
OR SERVICES; TO PROVIDE THAT THIS CLAIM MUST BE BROUGHT WITHIN THIRTY YEARS
FROM THE DATE THAT THE ALLEGED ACT OCCURRED; TO AUTHORIZE THE ATTORNEY GENERAL
TO BRING AN ACTION TO ENFORCE COMPLIANCE WITH THIS SECTION; TO PROVIDE THAT
THIS SECTION DOES NOT APPLY TO CERTAIN SERVICES, TREATMENTS AND PROCEDURES; TO
AMEND SECTION 73-25-29, MISSISSIPPI CODE OF 1972, TO CONFORM TO THE PROVISIONS OF
THIS ACT; TO AMEND SECTION 73-25-33, MISSISSIPPI CODE OF 1972, TO REVISE THE DEFINITION
OF THE PRACTICE OF MEDICINE TO EXCLUDE GENDER REASSIGNMENT SURGERY OR SERVICES
FOR MINORS; TO AMEND SECTION 11-46-5, MISSISSIPPI CODE OF 1972, TO PROVIDE THAT
UNDER THE TORT CLAIMS ACT AN EMPLOYEE SHALL NOT BE CONSIDERED AS ACTING WITHIN
THE COURSE AND SCOPE OF HIS OR HER EMPLOYMENT AND A GOVERNMENTAL ENTITY MAY BE
LIABLE OR BE CONSIDERED TO HAVE WAIVED IMMUNITY FOR ANY CONDUCT OF ITS EMPLOYEE
IF THE EMPLOYEE'S CONDUCT VIOLATED THE PROVISIONS OF THIS ACT; TO CREATE NEW
SECTION 43-13-117.7, MISSISSIPPI CODE OF 1972, TO PROHIBIT THE DIVISION OF MEDICAID
FROM REIMBURSING ANY ENTITY FOR PART OR ALL OF THE COSTS OF CARE AND SERVICES
RENDERED FOR GENDER REASSIGNMENT SURGERY OR SERVICES; TO CREATE NEW SECTION 83-9-401,
MISSISSIPPI CODE OF 1972, TO PROHIBIT HEALTH COVERAGE PLANS THAT ARE FUNDED
WHOLLY OR IN PART BY STATE FUNDS OR STATE-EMPLOYEE CONTRIBUTIONS FROM REIMBURSING
OR AUTHORIZING PAYMENT OF PART OR ALL OF THE COSTS OF CARE AND SERVICES
RENDERED BY ANY ENTITY FOR GENDER REASSIGNMENT SURGERY OR SERVICES; TO AMEND
SECTION 11-1-60, MISSISSIPPI CODE OF 1972, TO PROVIDE THAT IN ANY CAUSE OF
ACTION FILED ON OR AFTER JULY 1, 2023, FOR A CLAIM BROUGHT UNDER SECTION 11-77-3,
IF THE TRIER OF FACT FINDS THE DEFENDANT LIABLE, THERE SHALL NOT BE A
LIMITATION PLACED ON THE NONECONOMIC DAMAGES AWARD THAT A TRIER OF FACT MAY
AWARD TO THE PLAINTIFF; AND FOR RELATED PURPOSES.
     BE IT ENACTED BY THE
LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF MISSISSIPPI:
     SECTION 1.  This act shall
be known and may be cited as the "Mississippi Help Not Harm Act."
     SECTION 2.  The following
shall be codified as Section 11-77-1, Mississippi Code of 1972:
     11-77-1.  For
purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings as defined
in this section:
          (a)  "Gender"
means the psychological, behavioral, social and cultural aspects of being male
or female.
          (b)  "Gender
reassignment surgery or services" means any of the following medical or
surgical services performed on an individual for the purpose of attempting to
alter the appearance of or affirm an individual's perception of his or her
gender or sex, if that appearance or perception is inconsistent with the
individual's sex:
               (i)  Prescribing
or administering puberty blocking medication to stop or delay normal puberty;
               (ii)  Prescribing
or administering supraphysiologic doses of testosterone or other androgens to
females;
               (iii)  Prescribing
or administering supraphysiologic doses of estrogen to males;
               (iv)  Performing
surgeries that sterilize, including castration, vasectomy, hysterectomy,
oophorectomy, orchiectomy, and penectomy;
               (v)  Performing
surgeries that artificially construct tissue with the appearance of genitalia
that differs from the individual's sex, including metoidioplasty, phalloplasty,
and vaginoplasty; or
               (vi)  Removing any
healthy or non-diseased body part or tissue, except for a male circumcision.
          (c)  "Sex"
means the biological indication of male and female in the context of
reproductive potential or capacity, such as sex chromosomes, naturally
occurring sex hormones, gonads and nonambiguous internal and external genitalia
present at birth, without regard to an individual's psychological, chosen or
subjective experience of gender.
     SECTION 3.  The
following shall be codified as Section 11-77-3, Mississippi Code of 1972:
     11-77-3.  (1)  No person
shall knowingly perform or provide gender reassignment surgery or services to a
minor.
     (2)  No person shall
knowingly engage in conduct that aids or abets in gender reassignment surgery
or services being performed on or provided to a minor.  This section may not be
construed to impose liability on any speech or conduct protected by federal or
state law.
     (3)  Any licensed medical
professional, including, but not limited to, a physician, osteopath, physician
assistant, nurse practitioner or nurse, who violates the prohibition in subsection
(1) or (2) of this section shall have his or her license in the State of
Mississippi revoked pursuant to action taken by their respective licensing
board.
     (4)  For any claim accruing
on or after July 1, 2023, a private cause of action may be brought against a
physician, osteopath, hospital, prescribing caregiver, clinic and any other
health care facility for injuries arising out of the course of medical,
surgical or other professional services related to the performance of gender
reassignment surgery or services.  
     (5)  For any claim accruing
on or after July 1, 2023, no claim as provided for in subsection (4) of this
section may be brought unless it is filed within thirty (30) years from the
date the alleged act occurred.
(6)  The Attorney
General may bring an action to enforce compliance with this section.  Nothing
in this section shall be construed to deny, impair, or otherwise affect any
right or authority of the Attorney General, the state, or any agency, officer,
or employee of the state to institute or intervene in any proceeding.
     (7)  This section shall not
apply to:
          (a)  Services provided
to individuals born with a medically verifiable disorder of sex development,
including a person with external sex characteristics that are irresolvably
ambiguous, such as an individual born with forty-six XX chromosomes with
virilization, forty-six XY chromosomes with undervirilization, or having both
ovarian and testicular tissue;       (b)  Services provided to an individual
when a physician has otherwise diagnosed a disorder of sexual development, in
which the physician has determined through genetic or biochemical testing that
the individual does not have normal sex chromosome structure, sex steroid
hormone production, or sex steroid hormone action for a biological male or
biological female; 
          (c)  The treatment of
any infection, injury, disease or disorder that has been caused or exacerbated
by the performance of gender transition procedures, whether or not the
procedures were performed in accordance with state and federal law; or 
                        (d)  Any procedure undertaken
because an individual suffers from a physical disorder, physical injury, or
physical illness that is certified by a physician and that would place the
individual in imminent danger of death or impairment of major bodily function
unless surgery is performed.
     SECTION 4.  Section
73-25-29, Mississippi Code of 1972, is amended as follows:
     73-25-29.  The grounds for the
nonissuance, suspension, revocation or restriction of a license or the denial of
reinstatement or renewal of a license are:
          (1)  Habitual personal use
of narcotic drugs, or any other drug having addiction-forming or addiction-sustaining
liability.
          (2)  Habitual use of intoxicating
liquors, or any beverage, to an extent which affects professional competency.
          (3)  Administering, dispensing
or prescribing any narcotic drug, or any other drug having addiction-forming or
addiction-sustaining liability otherwise than in the course of legitimate professional
practice.
          (4)  Conviction of violation
of any federal or state law regulating the possession, distribution or use of any
narcotic drug or any drug considered a controlled substance under state or federal
law, a certified copy of the conviction order or judgment rendered by the trial
court being prima facie evidence thereof, notwithstanding the pendency of any appeal.
          (5)  Procuring, or attempting
to procure, or aiding in, an abortion that is not medically indicated.
          (6)  Conviction of a felony
or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, a certified copy of the conviction order
or judgment rendered by the trial court being prima facie evidence thereof, notwithstanding
the pendency of any appeal.
          (7)  Obtaining or attempting
to obtain a license by fraud or deception.
          (8)  Unprofessional conduct,
which includes, but is not limited to:
              (a)  Practicing medicine
under a false or assumed name or impersonating another practitioner, living or dead.
              (b)  Knowingly performing
any act which in any way assists an unlicensed person to practice medicine.
               (c)  Making or willfully
causing to be made any flamboyant claims concerning the licensee's professional
excellence.
              (d)  Being guilty of
any dishonorable or unethical conduct likely to deceive, defraud or harm the public.
              (e)  Obtaining a fee
as personal compensation or gain from a person on fraudulent representation of a
disease or injury condition generally considered incurable by competent medical
authority in the light of current scientific knowledge and practice can be cured
or offering, undertaking, attempting or agreeing to cure or treat the same by a
secret method, which he refuses to divulge to the board upon request.
              (f)  Use of any false,
fraudulent or forged statement or document, or the use of any fraudulent, deceitful,
dishonest or immoral practice in connection with any of the licensing requirements,
including the signing in his professional capacity any certificate that is known
to be false at the time he makes or signs such certificate.
              (g)  Failing to identify
a physician's school of practice in all professional uses of his name by use of
his earned degree or a description of his school of practice.
          (9)  The refusal of a licensing
authority of another state or jurisdiction to issue or renew a license, permit or
certificate to practice medicine in that jurisdiction or the revocation, suspension
or other restriction imposed on a license, permit or certificate issued by such
licensing authority which prevents or restricts practice in that jurisdiction, a
certified copy of the disciplinary order or action taken by the other state or jurisdiction
being prima facie evidence thereof, notwithstanding the pendency of any appeal.
          (10)  Surrender of a license
or authorization to practice medicine in another state or jurisdiction or surrender
of membership on any medical staff or in any medical or professional association
or society while under disciplinary investigation by any of those authorities or
bodies for acts or conduct similar to acts or conduct which would constitute grounds
for action as defined in this section.
          (11)  Final sanctions imposed
by the United States Department of Health and Human Services, Office of Inspector
General or any successor federal agency or office, based upon a finding of incompetency,
gross misconduct or failure to meet professionally recognized standards of health
care; a certified copy of the notice of final sanction being prima facie evidence
thereof.  As used in this paragraph, the term "final sanction" means the
written notice to a physician from the United States Department of Health and Human
Services, Officer of Inspector General or any successor federal agency or office,
which implements the exclusion.
          (12)  Failure to furnish
the board, its investigators or representatives information legally requested by
the board.
          (13)  Violation of any provision(s)
of the Medical Practice Act or the rules and regulations of the board or of any
order, stipulation or agreement with the board.
          (14)  Violation(s) of the
provisions of Sections 41-121-1 through 41-121-9 relating to deceptive advertisement
by health care practitioners.
          (15)  Performing or inducing
an abortion on a woman in violation of any provision of Sections 41-41-131 through
41-41-145.
          (16)  Performing an abortion
on a pregnant woman after determining that the unborn human individual that the
pregnant woman is carrying has a detectable fetal heartbeat as provided in Section
41-41-34.1.
          (17)  Knowingly performing
gender reassignment surgery or services on a minor as prohibited in Section 11-77-3.
     In addition to the grounds specified
above, the board shall be authorized to suspend the license of any licensee for
being out of compliance with an order for support, as defined in Section 93-11-153. 
The procedure for suspension of a license for being out of compliance with an order
for support, and the procedure for the reissuance or reinstatement of a license
suspended for that purpose, and the payment of any fees for the reissuance or reinstatement
of a license suspended for that purpose, shall be governed by Section 93-11-157
or 93-11-163, as the case may be.  If there is any conflict between any provision
of Section 93-11-157 or 93-11-163 and any provision of this chapter, the provisions
of Section 93-11-157 or 93-11-163, as the case may be, shall control. 
     A physician who provides a written
certification as authorized under the Mississippi Medical Cannabis Act and in compliance
with rules and regulations adopted thereunder shall not be subject to any disciplinary
action under this section solely due to providing the written certification.
     SECTION 5.  Section
73-25-33, Mississippi Code of 1972, is amended as follows:
     73-25-33.  (1)  The
practice of medicine shall mean to suggest, recommend, prescribe, or direct for
the use of any person, any drug, medicine, appliance, or other agency, whether material
or not material, for the cure, relief, or palliation of any ailment or disease
of the mind or body, or for the cure or relief of any wound or fracture or
other bodily injury or deformity, or the practice of obstetrics or midwifery,
after having received, or with the intent of receiving therefor, either
directly or indirectly, any bonus, gift, profit or compensation; provided, that
nothing in this section shall apply to females engaged solely in the practice
of midwifery.
     (2)  The practice of medicine
shall not mean to knowingly provide gender reassignment surgery or services for
minors.  For purposes of this subsection, gender reassignment surgery or services
means the services or activities prohibited under Section 11-77-3.
     SECTION 6.  Section
11-46-5, Mississippi Code of 1972, is amended as follows:
     11-46-5.  (1) 
Notwithstanding the immunity granted in Section 11-46-3, or the provisions of
any other law to the contrary, the immunity of the state and its political
subdivisions from claims for money damages arising out of the torts of such
governmental entities and the torts of their employees while acting within the
course and scope of their employment is hereby waived from and after July 1,
1993, as to the state, and from and after October 1, 1993, as to political
subdivisions; provided, however, immunity of a governmental entity in any such
case shall be waived only to the extent of the maximum amount of liability
provided for in Section 11-46-15.
     (2)  For the purposes of
this chapter an employee shall not be considered as acting within the course and
scope of his or her employment and a governmental entity shall not be
liable or be considered to have waived immunity for any conduct of its employee
if the employee's conduct constituted fraud, malice, libel, slander, defamation
or any criminal offense other than traffic violations.
     (3)  For the purposes of
this chapter and not otherwise, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that any
act or omission of an employee within the time and at the place of his or her
employment is within the course and scope of his employment except for actions
described in Section 73-25-33(2) and subsection (5) of this section.
     (4)  Nothing contained in
this chapter shall be construed to waive the immunity of the state from suit in
federal courts guaranteed by the Eleventh Amendment to the Constitution of the
United States.
     (5)  For the purposes of
this chapter, an employee shall not be considered as acting within the course and
scope of his or her employment, and a governmental entity may be liable or be
considered to have waived immunity for any conduct of its employee if the
employee's conduct constituted an act in violation of Section 11-77-3.
     SECTION 7.  The
following shall be codified as Section 43-13-117.7, Mississippi Code of 1972:
     43-13-117.7.  (1)  For
purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the meanings as defined
in this subsection:
          (a)  "Gender"
means the psychological, behavioral, social and cultural aspects of being male
or female.
          (b)  "Gender
reassignment surgery or service" means any of the following medical or
surgical services performed on an individual for the purpose of attempting to alter
the appearance of or affirm an individual's perception of his or her gender or
sex, if that appearance or perception is inconsistent with the individual's
sex:
               (i)  Prescribing
or administering puberty blocking medication to stop or delay normal puberty;
               (ii)  Prescribing
or administering supraphysiologic doses of testosterone or other androgens to
females;
               (iii)  Prescribing
or administering supraphysiologic doses of estrogen to males;
               (iv)  Performing
surgeries that sterilize, including castration, vasectomy, hysterectomy,
oophorectomy, orchiectomy, and penectomy; 
               (v)  Performing
surgeries that artificially construct tissue with the appearance of genitalia
that differs from the individual's sex, including metoidioplasty, phalloplasty,
and vaginoplasty; or
                                    (vi)  Removing any
healthy or non-diseased body part or tissue, except for a male circumcision;
          (c)  "Sex"
means the biological indication of male and female in the context of
reproductive potential or capacity, such as sex chromosomes, naturally
occurring sex hormones, gonads and nonambiguous internal and external genitalia
present at birth, without regard to an individual's psychological, chosen or
subjective experience of gender.
     (2)  The division shall not authorize
payment of part or all of the costs of care and services rendered by any entity
for gender reassignment surgery or services.
     SECTION 8.  The
following shall be codified as Section 83-9-401, Mississippi Code of 1972:
     83-9-401.  (1)  For
purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the meanings as defined
in this subsection:
          (a)  "Gender"
means the psychological, behavioral, social and cultural aspects of being male
or female.
          (b)  "Gender
reassignment surgery or service" means any of the following medical or
surgical services performed on an individual for the purpose of attempting to
alter the appearance of or affirm an individual's perception of his or her
gender or sex, if that appearance or perception is inconsistent with the
individual's sex:
               (i)  Prescribing
or administering puberty blocking medication to stop or delay normal puberty;
               (ii)  Prescribing
or administering supraphysiologic doses of testosterone or other androgens to
females;
               (iii)  Prescribing
or administering supraphysiologic doses of estrogen to males;
               (iv)  Performing
surgeries that sterilize, including castration, vasectomy, hysterectomy, oophorectomy,
orchiectomy, and penectomy; 
               (v)  Performing
surgeries that artificially construct tissue with the appearance of genitalia
that differs from the individual's sex, including metoidioplasty, phalloplasty,
and vaginoplasty; or
               (vii)  Removing
any healthy or non-diseased body part or tissue, except for a male
circumcision. 
          (c)  "Health
coverage plan" means any health or medical expense insurance policy,
hospital or medical service contract, employee welfare benefit plan, contract
or agreement with a health maintenance organization or a preferred provider
organization, health and accident insurance policy, including a group insurance
plan and the State Health Plan.
          (d)  "Sex"
means the biological indication of male and female in the context of
reproductive potential or capacity, such as sex chromosomes, naturally
occurring sex hormones, gonads and nonambiguous internal and external genitalia
present at birth, without regard to an individual's psychological, chosen or
subjective experience of gender.
            (2)  No health coverage plan that is
funded wholly or in part by state funds or state-employee contributions shall
reimburse or authorize payment of part or all of the costs of care and services
rendered by any entity for gender reassignment surgery or services.
     SECTION 9.  Section
11-1-60, Mississippi Code of 1972, is amended as follows:
     11-1-60.  (1) 
For the purposes of this section, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings ascribed herein unless the context clearly requires otherwise:
          (a)  "Noneconomic
damages" means subjective, nonpecuniary damages arising from death, pain,
suffering, inconvenience, mental anguish, worry, emotional distress, loss of society
and companionship, loss of consortium, bystander injury, physical impairment,
disfigurement, injury to reputation, humiliation, embarrassment, loss of the
enjoyment of life, hedonic damages, other nonpecuniary damages, and any other
theory of damages such as fear of loss, illness or injury.  The term "noneconomic
damages" shall not include punitive or exemplary damages.
          (b)  "Actual
economic damages" means objectively verifiable pecuniary damages arising
from medical expenses and medical care, rehabilitation services, custodial
care, disabilities, loss of earnings and earning capacity, loss of income,
burial costs, loss of use of property, costs of repair or replacement of
property, costs of obtaining substitute domestic services, loss of employment,
loss of business or employment opportunities, and other objectively verifiable
monetary losses.
     (2)  (a)  In any cause of
action filed on or after September 1, 2004, for injury based on malpractice or
breach of standard of care against a provider of health care, including
institutions for the aged or infirm, in the event the trier of fact finds the
defendant liable, they shall not award the plaintiff more than Five Hundred
Thousand Dollars ($500,000.00) for noneconomic damages.
          (b)  In any civil
action filed on or after September 1, 2004, other than those actions described
in paragraph (a) of this subsection, in the event the trier of fact finds the
defendant liable, they shall not award the plaintiff more than One Million
Dollars ($1,000,000.00) for noneconomic damages.
     It is the intent of this section
to limit all noneconomic damages to the above.
          (c)  The trier of fact
shall not be advised of the limitations imposed by this subsection (2) and the
judge shall appropriately reduce any award of noneconomic damages that exceeds
the applicable limitation.
     (3)  Nothing contained in
subsection (1) of this section shall be construed as creating a cause of action
or as setting forth elements of or types of damages that are or are not
recoverable in any type of cause of action.
     (4)  For any claim accruing
on or after July 1, 2023, subsections (1) through (3) of this section shall not
apply to a claim brought according to Section 11-77-3 against a licensed physician,
osteopath or hospital for injuries arising out of the course of medical,
surgical or other professional services related to the performance of gender reassignment
surgery or services.  In any cause of action filed on or after July 1, 2023, for
a claim brought according to Section 11-77-3, if the trier of fact finds the
defendant liable, there shall not be a limitation placed on the noneconomic damages
award that a trier of fact may award to the plaintiff.
     SECTION 10.  This act
shall take effect and be in force from and after July 1, 2023.










2023-2024 Bill 3730 Text of Previous Version (Jan. 18, 2023) - South Carolina Legislature Online
 

South Carolina General Assembly125th Session, 2023-2024Bill 3730Indicates Matter StrickenIndicates New Matter(Text matches printed bills. Document has been reformatted to meet World Wide Web specifications.)








A bill

TO AMEND THE SOUTH CAROLINA CODE OF LAWS BY ENACTING THE "MILLSTONE ACT OF 2023"; AND BY ADDING CHAPTER 141 TO TITLE 44 SO AS TO PROHIBIT HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONALS FROM MAKING REFERRALS FOR OR PROVIDING GENDER-TRANSITION PROCEDURES OR SERVICES TO ANYONE UNDER TWENTY-SIX YEARS OF AGE; TO PROHIBIT THE USE OF PUBLIC FUNDS FOR SUCH PROCEDURES; and TO CREATE A CRIMINAL PENALTY FOR VIOLATions, PROVIDE FOR PROFESSIONAL DISCIPLINE, ALLOW A PRIVATE RIGHT OF ACTION, AND AUTHORIZE THE ATTORNEY GENERAL TO ENFORCE THE CHAPTER.

Be it enacted by the General Assembly of the State of South Carolina:

SECTION 1.    This act may be cited as the "Millstone Act of 2023".

SECTION 2.   Title 44 of the S.C. Code is amended by adding:

   CHAPTER 141

   Millstone Act of 2023

   Section 44-141-10.   As used in this chapter:
   (1) "Biological sex" means the biological indication of male and female in the context of reproductive potential or capacity, such as sex chromosomes, naturally occurring sex hormones, gonads, and nonambiguous internal and external genitalia present at birth, without regard to an individual's psychological, chosen, or subjective experience of gender.
   (2) "Cross-sex hormones" means: 
      (a) testosterone or other androgens given to biological females in amounts that are larger or more potent than would normally occur naturally in healthy biological sex females; and 
      (b) estrogen given to biological males in amounts that are larger or more potent than would normally occur naturally in healthy biological sex males.
   (3) "Gender" means the psychological, behavioral, social, and cultural aspects of being male or female.
   (4) "Gender-reassignment surgery" means any medical or surgical service that seeks to surgically alter or remove healthy physical or anatomical characteristics or features that are typical for the individual's biological sex, in order to instill or create physiological or anatomical characteristics that resemble a sex different from the individual's biological sex including, but not limited to, genital or nongenital gender-reassignment surgery.
   (5) "Gender transition" means the process in which a person goes from identifying with and living as a gender that corresponds to his or her biological sex to identifying with and living as a gender different from his or her biological sex, and may involve social, legal, or physical changes.
   (6)(a) "Gender-transition procedures" means any medical or surgical service including, but not limited to, physician's services, inpatient and outpatient hospital services, or prescribed drugs related to gender transition that seeks to: 
      (i) alter or remove physical or anatomical characteristics or features that are typical for the individual's biological sex; or 
      (ii) instill or create physiological or anatomical characteristics that resemble a sex different from the individual's biological sex including, but not limited to, medical services that provide puberty-blocking drugs, cross-sex hormones, or other mechanisms to promote the development of feminizing or masculinizing features in the opposite biological sex, or genital or nongenital gender-reassignment surgery performed for the purpose of assisting an individual with a gender transition. 
   (b) Gender-transition procedures do not include: 
      (i) services to persons born with a medically verifiable disorder of sex development, including a person with external biological sex characteristics that are irresolvably ambiguous, such as those born with 46 XX chromosomes with virilization, 46 XY chromosomes with undervirilization, or having both ovarian and testicular tissue;
      (ii) services provided when a physician has otherwise diagnosed a disorder of sexual development that the physician has determined through genetic or biochemical testing that the person does not have normal sex chromosome structure, sex steroid hormone production, or sex steroid hormone action;
      (iii) the treatment of any infection, injury, disease, or disorder that has been caused by or exacerbated by the performance of gender-transition procedures, whether or not the gender-transition procedure was performed in accordance with state and federal law; or
      (iv) any procedure undertaken because the individual suffers from a physical disorder, physical injury, or physical illness that would, as certified by a physician, place the individual in imminent danger of death or impairment of major bodily function unless surgery is performed.
   (7) "Genital gender-reassignment surgery" means a medical procedure performed for the purpose of assisting an individual with a gender transition, including but not limited to: 
      (a) surgical procedures such as penectomy, orchiectomy, vaginoplasty, clitoroplasty, or vulvoplasty for biologically male patients or hysterectomy or oophorectomy for biologically female patients; 
      (b) reconstruction of the fixed part of the urethra with or without a metoidioplasty; or 
      (c) phalloplasty, vaginectomy, scrotoplasty, or implantation of erection or testicular prostheses for biologically female patients.
   (8) "Health care professional" means a person who is licensed, certified, or otherwise authorized by the laws of this State to administer health care in the ordinary course of the practice of the person's profession.
   (9) "Nongenital gender-reassignment surgery" means medical procedures performed for the purpose of assisting an individual with a gender transition including, but not limited to: 
      (a) surgical procedures for biologically male patients, such as augmentation mammoplasty, facial feminization surgery, liposuction, lipofilling, voice surgery, thyroid cartilage reduction, gluteal augmentation, hair reconstruction, or various aesthetic procedures; or 
      (b) surgical procedures for biologically female patients, such as subcutaneous mastectomy, voice surgery, liposuction, lipofilling, pectoral implants, or various aesthetic procedures.
   (10) "Physician" means a person who is licensed to practice medicine in this State.
   (11) "Puberty-blocking drugs" means gonadotropin releasing hormone analogues or other synthetic drugs used in biological males to stop luteinizing hormone secretion and therefore testosterone secretion, or synthetic drugs used in biological females which stop the production of estrogen and progesterone, when used to delay or suppress pubertal development in children for the purpose of assisting an individual with a gender transition
   (12) "Public funds" means state, county, or local governmental monies, in addition to any department, agency, or instrumentality authorized or appropriated under state law or derived from any fund authorized or appropriated under state law or derived from any fund in which such monies are deposited.

   Section 44-141-20.   (A) A physician or other health care professional shall not provide gender-transition procedures to any individual under twenty-six years of age.
   (B) A physician or other health care professional shall not refer any individual under twenty-six years of age to any health care professional for gender-transition procedures.
   (C) A physician or other health care professional is not prohibited from providing any of the following procedures which are not gender-transition procedures to an individual under twenty-six years of age:
      (1) services to persons born with a medically verifiable disorder of sex development, including a person with external biological sex characteristics that are irresolvably ambiguous, such as those born with 46 XX chromosomes with virilization, 46 XY chromosomes with undervirilization, or having both ovarian and testicular tissue;
      (2) services provided when a physician has otherwise diagnosed a disorder of sexual development that the physician has determined through genetic or biochemical testing that the person does not have normal sex chromosome structure, sex steroid hormone production, or sex steroid hormone action;
      (3) the treatment of any infection, injury, disease, or disorder that has been caused by or exacerbated by the performance of gender-transition procedures, whether or not the gender-transition procedure was performed in accordance with state and federal law or whether or not funding for the gender-transition procedure is permissible under Section 44-141-30; or
      (4) any procedure undertaken because the individual suffers from a physical disorder, physical injury, or physical illness that would, as certified by a physician, place the individual in imminent danger of death or impairment of major bodily function unless surgery is performed.

   Section 44-141-30.   (A) Public funds shall not be directly or indirectly used, granted, paid, or distributed to any entity, organization, or individual that provides gender-transition procedures to an individual under twenty-six years of age. 
   (B) Health care services furnished in the following situations shall not include gender-transition procedures to an individual under twenty-six years of age: 
      (1) by or in a health care facility owned by the State or a county or local government; or 
      (2) by a physician or other health care professional employed by the State or a county or local government. 
   (C) The state Medicaid program shall not reimburse or provide coverage for gender-transition procedures to an individual under twenty-six years of age. 

   Section 44-141-40.   (A)(1) A physician or other health care professional found to have knowingly referred for or provided gender-transition procedures to an individual under twenty-six years of age is guilty of a felony and, upon conviction, may be imprisoned not more than five years.
      (2) Prosecution for a criminal violation of this subsection must be commenced within forty years after the commission of such offense.
   (B)(1) Any referral for or provision of gender-transition procedures to an individual under twenty-six years of age is unprofessional conduct and shall, upon an adverse ruling by the appropriate licensing board, result in immediate revocation of the license or certificate of the physician or other health care professional.
      (2) Disciplinary proceedings against the physician or other health care professional must be commenced within forty years after the commission of such offense. 
   (C)(1) A person may assert an actual or threatened violation of this chapter as a claim or defense in a judicial or administrative proceeding and obtain compensatory damages, injunctive relief, declaratory relief, or any other appropriate relief. 
      (2) A person shall bring a claim for a violation of this chapter no later than forty years after the day the cause of action accrues. 
      (3) An individual under eighteen years of age may bring an action throughout their minority through a parent or next friend, and may bring an action in their own name upon reaching majority at any time from that point until forty years after reaching the age of majority. 
      (4) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, an action under this subsection may be commenced, and relief may be granted, in a judicial proceeding without regard to whether the person commencing the action has sought or exhausted available administrative remedies. 
      (5) In any action or proceeding to enforce a provision of this chapter, a prevailing party who establishes a violation of this chapter shall recover reasonable attorney fees.
   (D)(1) The Attorney General may bring an action to enforce compliance with this chapter. 
      (2) This chapter does not deny, impair, or otherwise affect any right or authority of the Attorney General, this State, or any agency, officer, or employee of the State, acting under any law other than this act, to institute or intervene in any proceeding.

SECTION 3.   The repeal or amendment by this act of any law, whether temporary or permanent or civil or criminal, does not affect pending actions, rights, duties, or liabilities founded thereon, or alter, discharge, release or extinguish any penalty, forfeiture, or liability incurred under the repealed or amended law, unless the repealed or amended provision shall so expressly provide.  After the effective date of this act, all laws repealed or amended by this act must be taken and treated as remaining in full force and effect for the purpose of sustaining any pending or vested right, civil action, special proceeding, criminal prosecution, or appeal existing as of the effective date of this act, and for the enforcement of rights, duties, penalties, forfeitures, and liabilities as they stood under the repealed or amended laws.

SECTION 4.   This act takes effect upon approval by the Governor.
----XX----
This web page was last updated on January 18, 2023 at 02:50 PM





 
88R1170 SRA-D


 


 

		By: Oliverson
H.B. No. 319




 


 



 		
			

A BILL TO BE ENTITLED




 
			

AN ACT




 
			
relating to protection of persons from participation in a health 



 
			
care service for reasons of conscience; providing a civil remedy; 



 
			
authorizing disciplinary action.



 
			
       BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF TEXAS:



 
			
       SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that:



 
			
             (1)  the public policy of this state is to respect the 



 
			
conscience of all health care providers and the right of each health 



 
			
care provider to hold their own belief about whether certain health 



 
			
care services are morally acceptable;



 
			
             (2)  without comprehensive protections, the conscience 



 
			
of health care providers may be violated; and



 
			
             (3)  each health care provider must be protected from 



 
			
required participation in a health care service in which the 



 
			
provider has declined participation for reasons of conscience and 



 
			
from discriminatory adverse action resulting from the 



 
			
nonparticipation.



 
			
       SECTION 2.  Chapter 161, Health and Safety Code, is amended 



 
			
by adding Subchapter X to read as follows:



 
			
SUBCHAPTER X.  TEXAS HEALTH CARE CONSCIENCE PROTECTION ACT



 
			
       Sec. 161.701.  DEFINITIONS.  In this subchapter:



 
			
             (1)  "Conscience" means a sincerely held set of moral 



 
			
convictions arising from:



 
			
                   (A)  a belief in and relation to God;



 
			
                   (B)  a religious faith or spiritual practice; or



 
			
                   (C)  a moral philosophy or ethical position, 



 
			
without regard to whether the philosophy or position is related to a 



 
			
religious faith.



 
			
             (2)  "Emergency care" means bona fide emergency 



 
			
services provided after a sudden onset of a medical or traumatic 



 
			
condition manifested by acute symptoms of sufficient severity, 



 
			
including severe pain, such that the absence of immediate medical 



 
			
attention could reasonably be expected to:



 
			
                   (A)  place the patient's health in serious 



 
			
jeopardy;



 
			
                   (B)  result in serious impairment to the patient's 



 
			
bodily functions; or



 
			
                   (C)  result in serious dysfunction of any bodily 



 
			
organ or body part of the patient.



 
			
             (3)  "Health care facility" means a public or private 



 
			
organization, corporation, partnership, sole proprietorship, 



 
			
association, agency, network, joint venture, or other entity that 



 
			
provides health care services to patients. The term includes a 



 
			
hospital, clinic, medical center, ambulatory surgical center, 



 
			
private physician's office, pharmacy, nursing home, laboratory or 



 
			
diagnostic facility, infirmary, dispensary, medical school, 



 
			
nursing school, pharmacy school, or medical training facility.



 
			
             (4)  "Health care provider" means a nurse, nurse aide, 



 
			
medical assistant, hospital employee, allied health professional, 



 
			
laboratory technician, clinic employee, nursing home employee, 



 
			
pharmacist, pharmacy employee, researcher, medical, pharmacy, or 



 
			
nursing school student, professional, paraprofessional, or, 



 
			
without regard to whether the person holds a license, any other 



 
			
person who furnishes or assists in the furnishing of a health care 



 
			
service.



 
			
             (5)  "Health care service" means any phase of patient 



 
			
health care or treatment.  The term includes:



 
			
                   (A)  examination, testing, diagnosis, referral, 



 
			
prognosis, dispensing or administering a drug or device, ancillary 



 
			
research, instruction, therapy, treatment, and preparing for or 



 
			
performing a surgery or procedure;



 
			
                   (B)  family planning, counseling, and referrals, 



 
			
and any other advice in connection with the use or procurement of 



 
			
contraceptives, sterilization, or abortion; and



 
			
                   (C)  record-making procedures, preparation of 



 
			
treatment notes, and any other care or treatment rendered by a 



 
			
health care facility, physician, or health care provider.



 
			
             (6)  "Physician" means an individual licensed to 



 
			
practice medicine in this state.



 
			
       Sec. 161.702.  RIGHT TO DECLINE PARTICIPATION IN HEALTH CARE 



 
			
SERVICE FOR REASONS OF CONSCIENCE; CONSTRUCTION OF SUBCHAPTER.  (a)  



 
			
Except as provided by Subsection (b), a person may decline to 



 
			
participate in a health care service for reasons of conscience.



 
			
       (b)  A person may not decline to participate in the following 



 
			
services: 



 
			
             (1)  emergency care; or



 
			
             (2)  except as provided by Chapter 166, life-sustaining 



 
			
treatment.



 
			
       (c)  Nothing in this subchapter may be construed to:



 
			
             (1)  supersede Chapter 166 governing the provision, 



 
			
withholding, or withdrawing of life-sustaining treatment; or



 
			
             (2)  apply to emergency care, life-sustaining 



 
			
treatment, or cardiopulmonary resuscitation.



 
			
       (d)  An exercise of the right of conscience under this 



 
			
section is limited to a person's right to refuse to participate in a 



 
			
specific health care service.



 
			
       Sec. 161.703.  IMMUNITY OF PHYSICIANS AND HEALTH CARE 



 
			
PROVIDERS.  A physician or health care provider may not be held 



 
			
civilly or criminally liable because the physician or health care 



 
			
provider declines to participate in a health care service wholly or 



 
			
partly for reasons of conscience.



 
			
       Sec. 161.704.  ADVERSE ACTION.  A person, including a public 



 
			
official and a medical school or other institution that conducts 



 
			
education or training programs for physicians or health care 



 
			
providers, violates this subchapter by taking an adverse action 



 
			
against another person because the other person declines to 



 
			
participate in a health care service for reasons of conscience. 



 
			
Violations include discrimination against or taking an adverse 



 
			
action with regard to: 



 
			
             (1)  licensure;



 
			
             (2)  certification; 



 
			
             (3)  employment terms, benefits, seniority status, 



 
			
promotion, or transfer;



 
			
             (4)  staff appointments or other privileges;



 
			
             (5)  denial of employment, admission, or participation 



 
			
in a program for which the other person is eligible;



 
			
             (6)  reference to reasons of conscience in an 



 
			
application form;



 
			
             (7)  questions regarding an applicant's participation 



 
			
in providing a health care service for reasons of conscience;



 
			
             (8)  imposition of a burden in the terms or conditions 



 
			
of employment;



 
			
             (9)  denial of aid, assistance, or benefits;



 
			
             (10)  conditional receipt of the aid, assistance, or 



 
			
benefits; or



 
			
             (11)  coercion or disqualification of the other person 



 
			
receiving aid, assistance, or benefits.



 
			
       Sec. 161.705.  PROTOCOL FOR DECLINING PARTICIPATION IN 



 
			
PROVISION OF HEALTH CARE SERVICE.  (a)  A health care facility shall 



 
			
develop a written protocol for circumstances in which a person 



 
			
declines to participate in providing a health care service, other 



 
			
than emergency care or life-sustaining treatment, for reasons of 



 
			
conscience. The protocol must:



 
			
             (1)  describe a patient's access to health care 



 
			
services and information to ensure the patient is not permanently 



 
			
or substantially prevented from obtaining the services; and



 
			
             (2)  explain the process the facility will implement to 



 
			
facilitate in a timely manner the patient's access to the services.



 
			
       (b)  A person who declines to participate in providing a 



 
			
health care service for reasons of conscience shall: 



 
			
             (1)  notify the health care facility of the 



 
			
declination; and



 
			
             (2)  comply with the applicable protocol developed 



 
			
under this section.



 
			
       (c)  This section does not permit a protocol developed under 



 
			
this section to require a health care facility, physician, or 



 
			
health care provider to counsel a patient or refer the patient to 



 
			
another physician or facility regarding a health care service that 



 
			
is contrary to the conscience of the physician or health care 



 
			
provider.



 
			
       Sec. 161.706.  DISCIPLINARY ACTION; COMPLAINT.  (a)  A 



 
			
health care facility, physician, or health care provider that holds 



 
			
a license issued by a licensing agency in this state is subject to 



 
			
review and disciplinary action by the licensing agency for a 



 
			
violation of this subchapter as if the facility, physician, or 



 
			
provider violated the applicable licensing law.



 
			
       (b)  A person who is injured by a violation of this 



 
			
subchapter may file a complaint with the licensing agency that 



 
			
issued a license to the health care facility, physician, or health 



 
			
care provider that allegedly violated this subchapter.



 
			
       (c)  A physician or health care provider may not file a 



 
			
complaint with the appropriate licensing agency under this section  



 
			
unless the physician or health care provider complies with the 



 
			
health care facility's protocol developed under Section 161.705.



 
			
       Sec. 161.707.  CIVIL REMEDIES.  A person who is injured by a 



 
			
violation of this subchapter may bring a civil action against a 



 
			
person who violates this subchapter. A person who brings an action 



 
			
under this section may obtain:



 
			
             (1)  injunctive relief;



 
			
             (2)  damages incurred by the person, including:



 
			
                   (A)  actual damages for all psychological, 



 
			
emotional, and physical injuries resulting from the violation of 



 
			
this subchapter;



 
			
                   (B)  court costs; and



 
			
                   (C)  reasonable attorney's fees; or



 
			
             (3)  both injunctive relief and damages.



 
			
       SECTION 3.  Not later than December 1, 2023, a health care 



 
			
facility, as that term is defined by Section 161.701, Health and 



 
			
Safety Code, as added by this Act, shall adopt protocols required by 



 
			
Section 161.705, Health and Safety Code, as added by this Act.



 
			
       SECTION 4.  Section 161.703, Health and Safety Code, as 



 
			
added by this Act, applies only to a cause of action that accrues on 



 
			
or after the effective date of this Act.



 
			
       SECTION 5.  This Act takes effect September 1, 2023.




 
 
 



REFERENCE TITLE: women's shelters;
  male employees; liability




 
 
 
 
State of
  Arizona
House of
  Representatives
Fifty-sixth
  Legislature
First Regular
  Session
2023
 
 
 




HB 2312




 




Introduced by 
Representatives Jones: Diaz, Harris, McGarr, Senator Wadsack
 



 
 
 
 
 
 
 
An Act
 
amending
title 12, chapter 6, article 12, Arizona Revised Statutes, by adding section 12-723;
relating to civil liability.
 
 
(TEXT OF BILL BEGINS ON NEXT PAGE)
 




Be it enacted by the Legislature of the State of Arizona:
Section 1. Title 12, chapter 6, article 12,
Arizona Revised Statutes, is amended by adding section 12-723, to read:
START_STATUTE12-723. Civil liability; gender discrimination claims by male employees
in women's shelters prohibited; definition
A. A facility that does not allow a
biological male employee to be in the presence of a woman or the woman's minor
children who are living in the facility is not liable for gender discrimination
if the facility's sole purpose is to provide a safe and stable shelter to women
or women with minor children. 
B. For the purposes of this section,
"facility" includes a women's shelter, a women's halfway house and a
sex trafficking rehabilitation center for women. END_STATUTE




MISSISSIPPI LEGISLATURE
2023 Regular Session
To: Judiciary B
By: Representative Massengill
House Bill 456
AN ACT TO AMEND SECTION 43-21-105, MISSISSIPPI CODE OF 1972,
TO REVISE THE DEFINITION OF CHILD ABUSE TO INCLUDE GENDER REASSIGNMENT; AND FOR
RELATED PURPOSES.
     BE IT ENACTED BY THE
LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF MISSISSIPPI:
     SECTION 1.  Section
43-21-105, Mississippi Code of 1972, is amended as follows:
     43-21-105.  The following
words and phrases, for purposes of this chapter, shall have the meanings
ascribed herein unless the context clearly otherwise requires:
          (a)  "Youth court"
means the Youth Court Division.
          (b)  "Judge"
means the judge of the Youth Court Division.
          (c)  "Designee"
means any person that the judge appoints to perform a duty which this chapter
requires to be done by the judge or his designee.  The judge may not appoint a
person who is involved in law enforcement or who is an employee of the
Mississippi Department of Human Services or the Mississippi Department of Child
Protection Services to be his designee.
          (d)  "Child"
and "youth" are synonymous, and each means a person who has not
reached his eighteenth birthday.  A child who has not reached his eighteenth
birthday and is on active duty for a branch of the armed services or is married
is not considered a "child" or "youth" for the purposes of
this chapter.
          (e)  "Parent"
means the father or mother to whom the child has been born, or the father or
mother by whom the child has been legally adopted.
          (f)  "Guardian"
means a court-appointed guardian of the person of a child.
          (g)  "Custodian"
means any person having the present care or custody of a child whether such
person be a parent or otherwise.
          (h)  "Legal
custodian" means a court-appointed custodian of the child.
          (i)  "Delinquent
child" means a child who has reached his tenth birthday and who has
committed a delinquent act.
          (j)  "Delinquent
act" is any act, which if committed by an adult, is designated as a crime
under state or federal law, or municipal or county ordinance other than
offenses punishable by life imprisonment or death.  A delinquent act includes
escape from lawful detention and violations of the Uniform Controlled
Substances Law and violent behavior.
          (k)  "Child in
need of supervision" means a child who has reached his seventh birthday
and is in need of treatment or rehabilitation because the child:
              (i)  Is habitually
disobedient of reasonable and lawful commands of his parent, guardian or
custodian and is ungovernable; or
              (ii)  While being
required to attend school, willfully and habitually violates the rules thereof
or willfully and habitually absents himself therefrom; or
              (iii)  Runs away
from home without good cause; or
              (iv)  Has committed
a delinquent act or acts.
          (l)  "Neglected
child" means a child:
              (i)  Whose parent,
guardian or custodian or any person responsible for his care or support,
neglects or refuses, when able so to do, to provide for him proper and
necessary care or support, or education as required by law, or medical,
surgical, or other care necessary for his well-being; however, a parent who
withholds medical treatment from any child who in good faith is under treatment
by spiritual means alone through prayer in accordance with the tenets and
practices of a recognized church or religious denomination by a duly accredited
practitioner thereof shall not, for that reason alone, be considered to be
neglectful under any provision of this chapter; or
              (ii)  Who is
otherwise without proper care, custody, supervision or support; or
              (iii)  Who, for any
reason, lacks the special care made necessary for him by reason of his mental condition,
whether the mental condition is having mental illness or having an intellectual
disability; or
              (iv)  Who, for any
reason, lacks the care necessary for his health, morals or well-being.
          (m)  "Abused child"
means a child whose parent, guardian or custodian or any person responsible for
his care or support, whether legally obligated to do so or not, has caused or
allowed to be caused, upon the child, sexual abuse, sexual exploitation,
commercial sexual exploitation, emotional abuse, mental injury, nonaccidental
physical injury or other maltreatment.  This term also means a child whose parent
has administered, supplied or consented to or assisted in the administration or
supply of, a puberty suppression prescription drug or cross-sex hormone to a child,
other than an intersex child, for the purpose of gender transitioning or gender
reassignment; or performed or consented to the performance of surgery or another
medical procedure on a child, other than an intersex child, for the purpose of gender
reassignment.  However, physical discipline, including spanking, performed
on a child by a parent, guardian or custodian in a reasonable manner shall not
be deemed abuse under this section.  "Abused child" also means a
child who is or has been trafficked within the meaning of the Mississippi Human
Trafficking Act by any person, without regard to the relationship of the person
to the child.
          (n)  "Sexual abuse"
means obscene or pornographic photographing, filming or depiction of children
for commercial purposes, or the rape, molestation, incest, prostitution or
other such forms of sexual exploitation of children under circumstances which
indicate that the child's health or welfare is harmed or threatened.
          (o)  "A child in
need of special care" means a child with any mental or physical illness
that cannot be treated with the dispositional alternatives ordinarily available
to the youth court.
          (p)  A "dependent
child" means any child who is not a child in need of supervision, a
delinquent child, an abused child or a neglected child, and which child has
been voluntarily placed in the custody of the Department of Child Protection
Services by his parent, guardian or custodian.
          (q)  "Custody"
means the physical possession of the child by any person.
          (r)  "Legal custody"
means the legal status created by a court order which gives the legal custodian
the responsibilities of physical possession of the child and the duty to
provide him with food, shelter, education and reasonable medical care, all
subject to residual rights and responsibilities of the parent or guardian of
the person.
          (s)  "Detention"
means the care of children in physically restrictive facilities.
          (t)  "Shelter"
means care of children in physically nonrestrictive facilities.
          (u)  "Records involving
children" means any of the following from which the child can be
identified:
              (i)  All youth
court records as defined in Section 43-21-251;
              (ii)  All forensic
interviews conducted by a child advocacy center in abuse and neglect
investigations;
              (iii)  All law
enforcement records as defined in Section 43-21-255;
              (iv)  All agency
records as defined in Section 43-21-257; and
              (v)  All other
documents maintained by any representative of the state, county, municipality
or other public agency insofar as they relate to the apprehension, custody,
adjudication or disposition of a child who is the subject of a youth court
cause.
          (v)  "Any person
responsible for care or support" means the person who is providing for the
child at a given time.  This term shall include, but is not limited to,
stepparents, foster parents, relatives, nonlicensed babysitters or other
similar persons responsible for a child and staff of residential care
facilities and group homes that are licensed by the Department of Human Services
or the Department of Child Protection Services.
          (w)  The singular
includes the plural, the plural the singular and the masculine the feminine
when consistent with the intent of this chapter.
          (x)  "Out-of-home"
setting means the temporary supervision or care of children by the staff of
licensed day care centers, the staff of public, private and state schools, the
staff of juvenile detention facilities, the staff of unlicensed residential
care facilities and group homes and the staff of, or individuals representing,
churches, civic or social organizations.
          (y)  "Durable
legal custody" means the legal status created by a court order which gives
the durable legal custodian the responsibilities of physical possession of the
child and the duty to provide him with care, nurture, welfare, food, shelter,
education and reasonable medical care.  All these duties as enumerated are
subject to the residual rights and responsibilities of the natural parent(s) or
guardian(s) of the child or children.
          (z)  "Status
offense" means conduct subject to adjudication by the youth court that
would not be a crime if committed by an adult.
          (aa)  "Financially
able" means a parent or child who is ineligible for a court-appointed
attorney.
          (bb)  "Assessment"
means an individualized examination of a child to determine the child's
psychosocial needs and problems, including the type and extent of any mental
health, substance abuse or co-occurring mental health and substance abuse
disorders and recommendations for treatment.  The term includes, but is not
limited to, a drug and alcohol, psychological or psychiatric evaluation,
records review, clinical interview or the administration of a formal test and
instrument.
          (cc)  "Screening"
means a process, with or without the administration of a formal instrument,
that is designed to identify a child who is at increased risk of having mental
health, substance abuse or co-occurring mental health and substance abuse
disorders that warrant immediate attention, intervention or more comprehensive
assessment.
          (dd)  "Durable
legal relative guardianship" means the legal status created by a youth
court order that conveys the physical and legal custody of a child or children
by durable legal guardianship to a relative or fictive kin who is licensed as a
foster or resource parent.
          (ee)  "Relative"
means a person related to the child by affinity or consanguinity within the
third degree.
          (ff)  "Fictive kin"
means a person not related to the child legally or biologically but who is considered
a relative due to a significant, familial-like and ongoing relationship with
the child and family.
          (gg)  "Reasonable
efforts" means the exercise of reasonable care and due diligence by the
Department of Human Services, the Department of Child Protection Services, or
any other appropriate entity or person to use appropriate and available
services to prevent the unnecessary removal of the child from the home or
provide other services related to meeting the needs of the child and the
parents.
          (hh)  "Commercial
sexual exploitation" means any sexual act or crime of a sexual nature,
which is committed against a child for financial or economic gain, to obtain a
thing of value for quid pro quo exchange of property or for any other purpose.
          (ii)  "Intersex
child" means a child who has inborn gonadal, genital, or endocrine characteristics,
or a combination of those characteristics, that are not suited to the typical definition
of male or female or are atypical for the determined sex of the child; or is considered
by a physician to have inborn chromosomal, gonadal, genital, or endocrine characteristics
that are ambiguous or atypical for the determined sex of the child.
     SECTION 2.  This act
shall take effect and be in force from and after July 1, 2023.






 
 
 



REFERENCE TITLE: unlawful exposure;
  minors; sentencing; reporting




 
 
 
 
State of
  Arizona
Senate
Fifty-sixth
  Legislature
First Regular
  Session
2023
 
 
 




SB 1698




 




Introduced by 
Senator Wadsack: Representatives Jones, McGarr
 



 
 
 
 
An Act
 
amending
sections 8-201, 11-811, 12-741, 13-705 and 13-1425,
Arizona Revised Statutes; amending title 13, chapter 35, Arizona Revised
Statutes, by adding section 13-3508; amending sections 13-3620 and
13-3821, Arizona Revised Statutes; relating to adult oriented
performances and businesses.
 
 
(TEXT OF BILL BEGINS ON NEXT PAGE)
 




Be it enacted by the Legislature of the State of Arizona:
Section 1. Section 8-201, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:
START_STATUTE8-201. Definitions
In this title, unless the context otherwise requires:
1. "Abandoned" means the failure of the
parent to provide reasonable support and to maintain regular contact with the
child, including providing normal supervision. Abandoned includes a
judicial finding that a parent has made only minimal efforts to support and
communicate with the child. Failure to maintain a normal parental
relationship with the child without just cause for a period of six months
constitutes prima facie evidence of abandonment.
2. "Abuse" means the infliction or
allowing of physical injury, impairment of bodily function or disfigurement or
the infliction of or allowing another person to cause serious emotional damage
as evidenced by severe anxiety, depression, withdrawal or untoward aggressive
behavior and which emotional damage is diagnosed by a medical doctor or psychologist
and is caused by the acts or omissions of an individual who has the care,
custody and control of a child. Abuse includes:
(a) Inflicting or allowing sexual abuse pursuant to
section 13-1404, sexual conduct with a minor pursuant to section 13-1405,
sexual assault pursuant to section 13-1406, molestation of a child
pursuant to section 13-1410, commercial sexual exploitation of a minor
pursuant to section 13-3552, sexual exploitation of a minor pursuant to
section 13-3553, incest pursuant to section 13-3608,
Unlawful exposure to an adult oriented performance or adult oriented business
pursuant to section 13-3508 or child sex trafficking pursuant to
section 13-3212.
(b) Physical injury that results from allowing a
child to enter or remain in any structure or vehicle in which volatile, toxic
or flammable chemicals are found or equipment is possessed by any person for
the purpose of manufacturing a dangerous drug as defined in section 13-3401.
(c) Unreasonable confinement of a child.
3. "Adult" means a person who is eighteen
years of age or older.
4. "Adult court" means the appropriate
justice court, municipal court or criminal division of the superior court that
has jurisdiction to hear proceedings concerning offenses committed by juveniles
as provided in sections 8-327 and 13-501.
5. "Award" or "commit" means to
assign legal custody.
6. "Child", "youth" or
"juvenile" means an individual who is under eighteen years of age.
7. "Complaint" means a written statement
of the essential facts constituting a public offense that is any of the
following:
(a) Made on an oath before a judge or commissioner
of the superior court or an authorized juvenile hearing officer.
(b) Made pursuant to section 13-3903.
(c) Accompanied by an affidavit of a law enforcement
officer or employee that swears on information and belief to the accuracy of
the complaint pursuant to section 13-4261.
8. "Criminal conduct allegation" means an
allegation of conduct by a parent, guardian or custodian of a child or an adult
member of the victim's household that, if true, would constitute any of the
following:
(a) A violation of section 13-3623 involving
child abuse.
(b) A felony offense that constitutes domestic
violence as defined in section 13-3601.
(c) A violation of section 13-1404 or 13-1406
involving a minor.
(d) A violation of section 13-1405, 13-1410
or 13-1417.
(e) Any other act of abuse that is classified as a
felony.
(f) An offense that constitutes domestic violence as
defined in section 13-3601 and that involves a minor who is a victim of
or was in imminent danger during the domestic violence.
9. "Custodian" means a person, other than
a parent or legal guardian, who stands in loco parentis to the child or a
person to whom legal custody of the child has been given by order of the
juvenile court.
10. "DCS report" means a communication
received by the centralized intake hotline that alleges child abuse or neglect
and that meets the criteria for a report as prescribed in section 8-455.
11. "Delinquency hearing" means a
proceeding in the juvenile court to determine whether a juvenile has committed
a specific delinquent act as set forth in a petition.
12. "Delinquent act" means an act by a
juvenile that if committed by an adult would be a criminal offense or a petty
offense, a violation of any law of this state, or of another state if the act
occurred in that state, or a law of the United States, or a violation of any
law that can only be violated by a minor and that has been designated as a
delinquent offense, or any ordinance of a city, county or political subdivision
of this state defining crime. Delinquent act does not include an
offense under section 13-501, subsection A or B if the offense is filed
in adult court. Any juvenile who is prosecuted as an adult or who is
remanded for prosecution as an adult shall not be adjudicated as a delinquent
juvenile for the same offense.
13. "Delinquent juvenile" means a child
who is adjudicated to have committed a delinquent act.
14. "Department" means the department of
child safety.
15. "Dependent child":
(a) Means a child who is adjudicated to be:
(i) In need of proper and effective parental care
and control and who has no parent or guardian, or one who has no parent or
guardian willing to exercise or capable of exercising such care and control.
(ii) Destitute or who is not provided with the
necessities of life, including adequate food, clothing, shelter or medical
care.
(iii) A child whose home is unfit by reason of
abuse, neglect, cruelty or depravity by a parent, a guardian or any other
person having custody or care of the child.
(iv) Under eight years of age and who is found to
have committed an act that would result in adjudication as a delinquent
juvenile or incorrigible child if committed by an older juvenile or child.
(v) Incompetent or not restorable to competency and
who is alleged to have committed a serious offense as defined in section 13-706.
(b) Does not include a child who in good faith is
being furnished Christian Science treatment by a duly accredited practitioner
if none of the circumstances described in subdivision (a) of this paragraph
exists.
16. "Detention" means the temporary
confinement of a juvenile who requires secure care in a physically restricting
facility that is completely surrounded by a locked and physically secure
barrier with restricted ingress and egress for the protection of the juvenile
or the community pending court disposition or as a condition of probation.
17. "Director" means the director of the
department.
18. "Health professional" has the same
meaning prescribed in section 32-3201.
19. "Incorrigible child" means a child
who:
(a) Is adjudicated as a child who refuses to obey
the reasonable and proper orders or directions of a parent, guardian or
custodian and who is beyond the control of that person.
(b) Is habitually truant from school as defined in
section 15-803, subsection C.
(c) Is a runaway from the child's home or parent,
guardian or custodian.
(d) Habitually behaves in such a manner as to injure
or endanger the morals or health of self or others.
(e) Commits any act constituting an offense that can
only be committed by a minor and that is not designated as a delinquent act.
(f) Fails to obey any lawful order of a court of
competent jurisdiction given in a noncriminal action.
20. "Independent living program" includes
a residential program with supervision of less than twenty-four hours a
day.
21. "Juvenile court" means the juvenile
division of the superior court when exercising its jurisdiction over children
in any proceeding relating to delinquency, dependency or incorrigibility.
22. "Law enforcement officer" means a
peace officer, sheriff, deputy sheriff, municipal police officer or constable.
23. "Medical director of a mental health
agency":
(a) Means a psychiatrist, or licensed physician
experienced in psychiatric matters, who is designated in writing by the
governing body of the agency as the person in charge of the medical services of
the agency, or a psychiatrist designated by the governing body to act for the
director.  
(b) Includes the superintendent of the state
hospital.
24. "Mental health agency" means any
private or public facility that is licensed by this state as a mental health
treatment agency, a psychiatric hospital, a psychiatric unit of a general
hospital or a residential treatment center for emotionally disturbed children
and that uses secure settings or mechanical restraints.
25. "Neglect" or "neglected"
means:
(a) The inability or unwillingness of a parent,
guardian or custodian of a child to provide that child with supervision, food,
clothing, shelter or medical care if that inability or unwillingness causes
substantial risk of harm to the child's health or welfare, except if the
inability of a parent, guardian or custodian to provide services to meet the
needs of a child with a disability or chronic illness is solely the result of
the unavailability of reasonable services.
(b) Allowing a child to enter or remain in any
structure or vehicle in which volatile, toxic or flammable chemicals are found
or equipment is possessed by any person with the intent and for the purpose of
manufacturing a dangerous drug as defined in section 13-3401.
(c) A determination by a health professional that a
newborn infant was exposed prenatally to a drug or substance listed in section
13-3401 and that this exposure was not the result of a medical treatment
administered to the mother or the newborn infant by a health professional.
This subdivision does not expand a health professional's duty to report neglect
based on prenatal exposure to a drug or substance listed in section 13-3401
beyond the requirements prescribed pursuant to section 13-3620,
subsection E. The determination by the health professional shall be
based on one or more of the following:
(i) Clinical indicators in the prenatal period
including maternal and newborn presentation.
(ii) History of substance use or abuse.
(iii) Medical history.
(iv) Results of a toxicology or other laboratory
test on the mother or the newborn infant.
(d) Diagnosis by a health professional of an infant
under one year of age with clinical findings consistent with fetal alcohol
syndrome or fetal alcohol effects.
(e) Deliberate exposure of a child by a parent,
guardian or custodian to sexual conduct as defined in section 13-3551 or
to sexual contact, oral sexual contact or sexual intercourse as defined in
section 13-1401, bestiality as prescribed in section 13-1411, an adult oriented performance or adult oriented business as
prescribed in section 13-3508 or explicit sexual materials as
defined in section 13-3507.
(f) Any of the following acts committed by the
child's parent, guardian or custodian with reckless disregard as to whether the
child is physically present:
(i) Sexual contact as defined in section 13-1401.
(ii) Oral sexual contact as defined in section 13-1401.
(iii) Sexual intercourse as defined in section 13-1401.
(iv) Bestiality as prescribed in section 13-1411.
26. "Newborn infant" means a child who is
under thirty days of age.
27. "Petition" means a written statement
of the essential facts that allege delinquency, incorrigibility or dependency.
28. "Prevention" means the creation of
conditions, opportunities and experiences that encourage and develop healthy,
self-sufficient children and that occur before the onset of problems. 
29. "Protective supervision" means
supervision that is ordered by the juvenile court of children who are found to
be dependent or incorrigible.
30. "Qualified young adult" means a former
dependent child who is at least eighteen years of age and not over twenty-one
years of age, who meets the criteria for an extended foster care program
pursuant to section 8-521.02 and who signs a voluntary agreement to
participate in the program.
31. "Referral" means a report that is
submitted to the juvenile court and that alleges that a child is dependent or
incorrigible or that a juvenile has committed a delinquent or criminal act.
32. "Secure care" means confinement in a
facility that is completely surrounded by a locked and physically secure
barrier with restricted ingress and egress.
33. "Serious emotional injury" means an
injury that is diagnosed by a medical doctor or a psychologist and that does
any one or a combination of the following:
(a) Seriously impairs mental faculties.
(b) Causes serious anxiety, depression, withdrawal
or social dysfunction behavior to the extent that the child suffers dysfunction
that requires treatment.
(c) Is the result of sexual abuse pursuant to
section 13-1404, sexual conduct with a minor pursuant to section 13-1405,
sexual assault pursuant to section 13-1406, molestation of a child
pursuant to section 13-1410, child sex trafficking pursuant to section 13-3212,
commercial sexual exploitation of a minor pursuant to section 13-3552,
sexual exploitation of a minor pursuant to section 13-3553 or incest
pursuant to section 13-3608.
34. "Serious physical injury" means an
injury that is diagnosed by a medical doctor and that does any one or a
combination of the following:
(a) Creates a reasonable risk of death.
(b) Causes serious or permanent disfigurement.
(c) Causes significant physical pain.
(d) Causes serious impairment of health.
(e) Causes the loss or protracted impairment of an
organ or limb.
(f) Is the result of sexual abuse pursuant to
section 13-1404, sexual conduct with a minor pursuant to section 13-1405,
sexual assault pursuant to section 13-1406, molestation of a child
pursuant to section 13-1410, child sex trafficking pursuant to section 13-3212,
commercial sexual exploitation of a minor pursuant to section 13-3552,
sexual exploitation of a minor pursuant to section 13-3553 or incest
pursuant to section 13-3608.
35. "Shelter care" means the temporary
care of a child in any public or private facility or home that is licensed by
this state and that offers a physically nonsecure environment that is
characterized by the absence of physically restricting construction or hardware
and that provides the child access to the surrounding community. 
36. "Young adult administrative review"
means an administrative review of a voluntary extended foster care case plan
with the qualified young adult, the department's case specialist or designee,
an independent party who is not responsible for the case management of or the
delivery of services to the qualified young adult and any other individual the
young adult invites. END_STATUTE
Sec. 2. Section 11-811, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:
START_STATUTE11-811. Zoning ordinance; zoning districts; definitions
A. Pursuant to this article, the board of
supervisors may adopt a zoning ordinance in order to
conserve and promote the public health, safety, convenience and general
welfare. The zoning ordinance and all rezonings and zoning
regulations amendments adopted under this article shall be consistent with and
conform to the adopted comprehensive plan. In addition to the other matters
that are required or authorized under this section and article 1 of this
chapter, the zoning ordinance:
1. Shall show the zoning districts designated as
appropriate for various classes of residential, business and industrial uses
and shall provide for the establishment of setback lines and other plans
providing for adequate light, air and parking facilities and for expediting
traffic within the districts. 
2. May establish the percentage of a lot or parcel
that may be covered by buildings and the size of yards, courts and other open
spaces.
3. Shall consider access to incident solar energy.
4. May provide for retirement community zoning
districts.
5. May provide for the regulation and use of
business licenses, adult oriented business manager permits and adult service
provider permits in conjunction with the establishment or operation of adult
oriented businesses and facilities, including adult arcades, adult bookstores
or video stores, cabarets, adult live entertainment establishments, adult
motion picture theaters, adult theaters, massage establishments and nude model
studios. With respect to cabarets, the ordinance shall not conflict with
specific statutory or valid regulatory requirements applicable to persons
licensed to dispense alcoholic beverages, but the ordinance may include
regulation of the age and conduct of erotic entertainers in a manner at least
as restrictive as rules adopted under title 4. Notwithstanding section 11-812,
a county in regulating or licensing businesses and facilities pursuant to this
paragraph may impose reasonable operating requirements that affect the existing
uses of businesses and facilities.
6. Shall designate and zone appropriate areas of
reasonable size in which there may be established with reasonable permanency
canneries, fertilizer plants, refineries, commercial feedlots, meat packing
plants, tallow works and other like businesses. A dairy operation,
including areas designated for the raising of replacement heifers or bulls
owned by the same dairy operation, is not subject to this paragraph, and is a
general agricultural purpose under subsection D, paragraph 2 of this section
and section 11-812, subsection A, paragraph 2. A replacement
heifer or bull raising operation of a dairy that is not on contiguous property
of the dairy is subject to this paragraph unless the operation begins within
one-quarter mile of the dairy. 
B. To carry out the purposes of this article, the
board may adopt overlay zoning districts and regulations applicable to
particular buildings, structures and land within individual
zones. For the purposes of this subsection, "overlay zoning
district" means a special zoning district that includes regulations that
modify regulations in another zoning district with which the overlay zoning
district is combined. Overlay zoning districts and regulations shall be
adopted pursuant to section 11-813. The provisions of overlay
zoning shall apply retroactively to authorize overlay zoning districts and
regulations adopted before April 20, 1993.
C. In accordance with article II, sections 1 and 2,
Constitution of Arizona, the board shall consider the individual property
rights and personal liberties of the residents of the county before adopting
any zoning ordinance.
D. This section does not authorize:
1. The imposition of dedications, exactions, fees or
other requirements that are not otherwise authorized by law.
2. The regulation or
restriction of the use or occupation of land or improvements for railroad,
mining, metallurgical, grazing or general agricultural purposes, if the tract
concerned is five or more contiguous commercial acres. For the
purposes of this paragraph, general agricultural purposes do not include the
cultivation of cannabis as defined in section 13-3401 or marijuana as
defined in section 13-3401 or 36-2801.
E. For the purposes of this section:
1. "Adult arcade" means any place to which
the public is permitted allowed or
invited and in which coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically,
electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines,
projectors or other image producing image-producing
devices are maintained to show images involving specific sexual activities or
specific anatomical areas to persons in booths or viewing rooms.
2. "Adult bookstore or video store" means
a commercial establishment that offers for sale or rent any of the following as
one of its principal business purposes:
(a) Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed
matter, photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes or reproductions or
slides or other visual representations that depict or describe specific sexual
activities or specific anatomical areas.
(b) Instruments, devices or paraphernalia that are
designed for use in connection with specific sexual activities.
3. "Adult live entertainment
establishment" means an establishment that features either:
(a) Persons who appear in a state of nudity.
(b) Live performances that are characterized by the
exposure of specific anatomical areas or specific sexual activities.
4. "Adult motion picture theater" means a
commercial establishment in which for any form of consideration films, motion
pictures, videocassettes, slides or other similar photographic reproductions
that are characterized by the depiction or description of specific sexual
activities or specific anatomical areas are predominantly shown.
5. "Adult oriented business" means adult
arcades, adult bookstores or video stores, cabarets, adult live entertainment
establishments, adult motion picture theaters, adult theaters, massage
establishments that offer adult service, drag shows or
establishments that conduct drag shows or nude model studios.
6. "Adult oriented business manager" means
a person on the premises of an adult oriented business who is authorized to
exercise overall operational control of the business.
7. "Adult service" means dancing, serving
food or beverages, modeling, posing, wrestling, singing, reading, talking,
listening or other performances or activities conducted for any consideration
in an adult oriented business by a person who is nude or seminude during all or
part of the time that the person is providing the service.
8. "Adult service provider" or
"erotic entertainer" means any natural person who provides an adult
service.
9. "Adult theater" means a theater,
concert hall, auditorium or similar commercial establishment that predominantly
features persons who appear in a state of nudity or who engage in live
performances that are characterized by the exposure of specific anatomical
areas or specific sexual activities.
10. "Cabaret" means an adult oriented
business licensed to provide alcoholic beverages pursuant to title 4, chapter
2, article 1.
11. "Discernibly turgid state" means the
state of being visibly swollen, bloated, inflated or distended.
12. "Drag show" means a
show or performance for entertainment during which a single performer or group
of performers do both of the following:
(a) Dress in
clothing and use makeup and other physical markers opposite of the performer's
or group of performers' genders at birth to exaggerate gender signifiers and
roles. 
(b) Engage in
singing, dancing or a monologue or skit in order to entertain an audience of
two or more people.
12. 13. "Massage
establishment" means an establishment in which a person, firm, association
or corporation engages in or permits allows
massage activities, including any method of pressure on, friction against,
stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating or stimulating of
external soft parts of the body with the hands or with the aid of any
mechanical apparatus or electrical apparatus or appliance. This paragraph does
not apply to:
(a) Persons who are licensed pursuant to title 32,
chapter 7, 8, 13, 14 or 17.
(b) Registered nurses, licensed practical nurses or
technicians who are acting under the supervision of a physician who is licensed
pursuant to title 32, chapter 13 or 17.
(c) Registered nurse practitioners who are licensed
pursuant to title 32, chapter 15.
(d) Persons who are employed or acting as trainers
for a bona fide amateur, semiprofessional or professional athlete or athletic
team.
(e) Persons who are licensed pursuant to title 32,
chapter 3 or 5 if the activity is limited to the head, face or neck.
13. 14. "Nude
model studio":
(a) Means
a place in which a person who appears in a state of nudity or who displays
specific anatomical areas is observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured,
photographed or otherwise depicted by other persons who pay money or other
consideration. Nude model studio 
(b) Does
not include a proprietary school that is licensed by this state, a college,
community college or university that is supported entirely or in part by
taxation, a private college or university that maintains and operates
educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, community
college or university that is supported entirely or in part by taxation or a
structure to which the following apply:
(a) (i) A sign is not visible from the exterior of the
structure and no other advertising appears indicating that a nude person is
available for viewing.
(b) (ii) A student must enroll at least three days in advance
of a class in order to participate.
(c) (iii) No Not
more than one nude or seminude model is on the premises at any time.
14. 15. "Nude",
"nudity" or "state of nudity" means any of the following:
(a) The appearance of a human anus, genitals or a
female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola.
(b) A state of dress that fails to opaquely cover a
human anus, genitals or a female breast below a point immediately above the top
of the areola.
15. 16. "Principal
business purposes" means that a commercial establishment derives fifty
percent or more of its gross income from the sale or rental of items listed in
paragraph 2 of this subsection.
16. 17. "Seminude"
means a state of dress in which clothing covers no not more than the genitals, pubic region and female breast
below a point immediately above the top of the areola, as well as portions of
the body that are covered by supporting straps or devices.
17. 18. "Specific
anatomical areas" means any of the following:
(a) A human anus, genitals, the pubic region or a
female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola that is
less than completely and opaquely covered.
(b) Male genitals in a discernibly turgid state even
if completely and opaquely covered.
18. 19. "Specific
sexual activities" means any of the following:
(a) Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation
or arousal.
(b) Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or
simulated, including acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, oral
copulation or sodomy.
(c) Fondling or other erotic touching of the human
genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breast.
(d) Excretory functions as part of or in connection
with any of the activities under subdivision (a), (b) or (c) of this paragraph.
END_STATUTE
Sec. 3. Section 12-741, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:
START_STATUTE12-741. Unauthorized disclosure of intimate images; civil action;
exceptions; confidential information form; remedies; statute of limitations;
definitions
A. A person is liable in a civil action for
intentionally disclosing or threatening to disclose an intimate image of
another individual if the depicted individual suffers harm from the disclosure
or threatened disclosure and the person knew or should have known all of the
following:
1. The depicted individual did not consent to the
disclosure.
2. The intimate image was private.
3. The depicted individual was identifiable from the
image itself or from information that is displayed in connection with the
image.
B. Evidence that the depicted individual consented
to the creation of the image or that the depicted individual previously
consented to the disclosure of the image does not by itself establish that the
depicted individual consented to the disclosure of the intimate image or that
the depicted individual lacked a reasonable expectation of privacy.
C. A depicted individual who does not consent to the
specific sexual activities or state of nudity depicted in an intimate image of
the individual retains a reasonable expectation of privacy even if the image
was created when the depicted individual was in a public place.
D. Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, a
person is not liable under this section if the person proves that disclosing or
threatening to disclose the intimate image was any of the following:
1. Made in good faith in any of the following:
(a) Law enforcement.
(b) A legal proceeding.
(c) Medical education or treatment.
2. Made in good faith in reporting or investigating
any of the following:
(a) Unlawful conduct.
(b) Unsolicited and unwelcome conduct.
3. Related to a matter of public concern or public
interest.
4. Reasonably intended to assist the depicted
individual.
5. Made by a parent, legal guardian or individual
with legal custody of a child and the depicted individual is the child unless
the image is disclosed with the intent to harm the depicted individual.
E. Subsection D of this section does not apply if
the plaintiff proves the disclosure was prohibited by law or made for the
purpose of sexual arousal, sexual gratification, humiliation, degradation or
monetary or commercial gain.
F. Disclosing or threatening to disclose an intimate
image is not a matter of public concern or public interest solely because the
depicted individual is a public figure.
G. If the plaintiff files with the court and serves
on the defendant a confidential information form that includes the excluded or
redacted plaintiff's name and other identifying characteristics, the court may
exclude or redact from all pleadings and documents filed in the action other
identifying characteristics of the plaintiff. The court may make
further orders as necessary to protect the identity and privacy of a plaintiff.
H. The prevailing
plaintiff may recover:
1. The greater of:
(a) Economic and
noneconomic damages that are proximately caused by the defendant's disclosure
or threatened disclosure, including damages for emotional distress whether or
not accompanied by other damages.
(b) Statutory damages of not more than $10,000
against each defendant found liable under this section for all of the
defendant's disclosures and threatened disclosures that the plaintiff knew or
reasonably should have known when filing the action or that became known during
the pendency of the action. In determining the amount of statutory
damages under this subdivision, consideration must be given to the age of the
parties at the time of the disclosure or threatened disclosure, the number of
disclosures or threatened disclosures made by the defendant, the breadth of
distribution of the image by the defendant and other exacerbating or mitigating
factors. 
2. An amount equal to any monetary gain made by the
defendant from disclosing or threatening to disclose the intimate image.
3. Punitive damages.
4. Reasonable attorney fees and costs. 
5. Additional relief, including injunctive relief.
I. A civil action for an unauthorized disclosure may
not be brought later than four years after the date that the disclosure was
discovered or should have been discovered with the exercise of reasonable
diligence except that a threat to disclose may not be brought later than four
years after the date of the threat to disclose.
J. In a civil action brought by a depicted
individual who was a minor on the date of the disclosure or threat to disclose,
the time specified in subsection I of this section does not begin to run until
the depicted individual attains the age of majority.
K. For the purposes of this section:
1. "Consent" means affirmative, conscious
and voluntary authorization by an individual with legal capacity to give
authorization.
2. "Depicted individual" means an
individual whose body is shown in whole or in part in an intimate image.
3. "Disclose" or "disclosure"
means to display, distribute, publish, advertise or offer.
4. "Harm" includes physical harm, economic
harm and emotional distress whether or not accompanied by physical or economic
harm.
5. "Intimate image" means a photograph,
film, videotape, digital recording or other similar medium that shows a state
of nudity or specific sexual activities.
6. "Private"
means either of the following:
(a) Created or obtained
under circumstances in which a depicted individual had a reasonable expectation
of privacy.
(b) Made accessible
through theft, bribery, extortion, fraud, false pretenses, voyeurism or
exceeding authorized access to an account, message, file, device, resource or
property.
7. "Specific sexual activities" has the
same meaning prescribed in section 11-811.
8. "State of nudity" has the same meaning
prescribed in section 11-811, subsection E, paragraph 14 15, subdivision (a). END_STATUTE
Sec. 4. Section 13-705, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:
START_STATUTE13-705. Dangerous crimes against children; sentences; definitions
A. A person who is at least eighteen years of age
and who is convicted of a dangerous crime against children in the first degree
involving commercial sexual exploitation of a minor or child sex trafficking
and the person has previously been convicted of a dangerous crime against
children in the first degree shall be sentenced to imprisonment in the custody
of the state department of corrections for natural life. A person who is
sentenced to natural life is not eligible for commutation, parole, work
furlough, work release or release from confinement on any basis for the
remainder of the person's natural life. 
B. A person who is at least eighteen years of age
and who is convicted of a dangerous crime against children in the first degree
involving sexual assault of a minor who is twelve years of age or younger or
sexual conduct with a minor who is twelve years of age or younger shall be
sentenced to life imprisonment and is not eligible for suspension of sentence,
probation, pardon or release from confinement on any basis except as
specifically authorized by section 31-233, subsection A or B until the
person has served thirty-five years or the sentence is commuted. This
subsection does not apply to masturbatory contact.
C. Except as otherwise provided in this section, a
person who is at least eighteen years of age or who has been tried as an adult
and who is convicted of a dangerous crime against children in the first degree
involving attempted first degree murder of a minor who is under twelve years of
age, sexual assault of a minor who is under twelve years of age, sexual conduct
with a minor who is under twelve years of age or manufacturing methamphetamine
under circumstances that cause physical injury to a minor who is under twelve
years of age may be sentenced to life imprisonment and is not eligible for
suspension of sentence, probation, pardon or release from confinement on any
basis except as specifically authorized by section 31-233, subsection A
or B until the person has served thirty-five years or the sentence is
commuted. If a life sentence is not imposed pursuant to this subsection, the
person shall be sentenced to a term of imprisonment as follows:
Minimum Presumptive Maximum
13 years 20 years 27
years 
D. Except as otherwise provided in this section, a
person who is at least eighteen years of age or who has been tried as an adult
and who is convicted of a dangerous crime against children in the first degree
involving second degree murder of a minor who is under fifteen years of age may
be sentenced to life imprisonment and is not eligible for suspension of
sentence, probation, pardon or release from confinement on any basis except as
specifically authorized by section 31-233, subsection A or B until the
person has served thirty-five years or the sentence is commuted. If a
life sentence is not imposed pursuant to this subsection, the person shall be
sentenced to a term of imprisonment as follows:
Minimum Presumptive Maximum
25 years 30 years 35
years 
E. Except as otherwise provided in this section, a
person who is at least eighteen years of age or who has been tried as an adult
and who is convicted of a dangerous crime against children in the first degree
involving attempted first degree murder of a minor who is twelve, thirteen or
fourteen years of age, sexual assault of a minor who is twelve, thirteen or
fourteen years of age, taking a child for the purpose of prostitution, child
sex trafficking, commercial sexual exploitation of a minor, sexual conduct with
a minor who is twelve, thirteen or fourteen years of age or manufacturing
methamphetamine under circumstances that cause physical injury to a minor who
is twelve, thirteen or fourteen years of age or involving or using minors in
drug offenses shall be sentenced to a term of imprisonment as follows:
Minimum Presumptive Maximum
13 years 20 years 27 years
A person who has been previously
convicted of one predicate felony shall be sentenced to a term of imprisonment
as follows:
Minimum Presumptive Maximum
23 years 30 years 37
years
F. Except as otherwise provided in this section, a
person who is at least eighteen years of age or who has been tried as an adult
and who is convicted of a dangerous crime against children in the first degree
involving aggravated assault, unlawful mutilation, molestation of a child,
sexual exploitation of a minor, aggravated luring a minor for sexual
exploitation, child abuse or kidnapping shall be sentenced to a term of
imprisonment as follows:
Minimum Presumptive Maximum
10 years 17 years 24 years
A person who has been previously
convicted of one predicate felony shall be sentenced to a term of imprisonment
as follows:
Minimum Presumptive Maximum
21 years 28 years 35
years
G. Except as otherwise provided in this section, if
a person is at least eighteen years of age or has been tried as an adult and is
convicted of a dangerous crime against children involving luring a minor for
sexual exploitation, sexual extortion, or
unlawful age misrepresentation or unlawful exposure to an adult
oriented performance or adult oriented business pursuant to section 13-3508
and is sentenced to a term of imprisonment, the term of imprisonment is as
follows and the person is not eligible for release from confinement on any
basis except as specifically authorized by section 31-233, subsection A
or B until the sentence imposed by the court has been served or is commuted,
except that if the person is convicted of unlawful age misrepresentation the
person is eligible for release pursuant to section 41-1604.07:
Minimum Presumptive Maximum
5 years 10 years 15 years
A person who has been previously
convicted of one predicate felony shall be sentenced to a term of imprisonment
as follows and the person is not eligible for suspension of sentence,
probation, pardon or release from confinement on any basis except as
specifically authorized by section 31-233, subsection A or B until the
sentence imposed by the court has been served or is commuted, except that if
the person is convicted of unlawful age misrepresentation the person is eligible
for release pursuant to section 41-1604.07:
Minimum Presumptive Maximum
8 years 15 years 22
years
H. Except as otherwise provided in this section, if
a person is at least eighteen years of age or has been tried as an adult and is
convicted of a dangerous crime against children involving sexual abuse or
bestiality under section 13-1411, subsection A, paragraph 2 and is
sentenced to a term of imprisonment, the term of imprisonment is as follows and
the person is not eligible for release from confinement on any basis except as
specifically authorized by section 31-233, subsection A or B until the
sentence imposed by the court has been served, the person is eligible for
release pursuant to section 41-1604.07 or the sentence is commuted:
Minimum Presumptive Maximum
2.5 years 5 years 7.5 years
A person who has been previously
convicted of one predicate felony shall be sentenced to a term of imprisonment
as follows and the person is not eligible for suspension of sentence,
probation, pardon or release from confinement on any basis except as
specifically authorized by section 31-233, subsection A or B until the
sentence imposed by the court has been served, the person is eligible for
release pursuant to section 41-1604.07 or the sentence is commuted:
Minimum Presumptive Maximum
8 years 15 years 22
years
I. Except as otherwise provided in this section, a
person who is at least eighteen years of age or who has been tried as an adult
and who is convicted of a dangerous crime against children in the first degree involving
continuous sexual abuse of a child shall be sentenced to a term of imprisonment
as follows:
Minimum Presumptive Maximum
39 years 60 years 81 years
A person who has been previously
convicted of one predicate felony shall be sentenced to a term of imprisonment
as follows:
Minimum Presumptive Maximum
69 years 90 years 111
years
J. The presumptive sentences prescribed in
subsections C, D, E, and F and I of
this section or subsections G and H of this section if the person has
previously been convicted of a predicate felony may be increased or decreased
pursuant to section 13-701, subsections C, D and E.
K. Except as provided in subsections G, H, M and N
of this section, a person who is sentenced for a dangerous crime against
children in the first degree pursuant to this section is not eligible for
suspension of sentence, probation, pardon or release from confinement on any
basis except as specifically authorized by section 31-233, subsection A
or B until the sentence imposed by the court has been served or commuted.
L. A person who is convicted of any dangerous crime
against children in the first degree pursuant to subsection C, D, E, or F or I of this section and who has
been previously convicted of two or more predicate felonies shall be sentenced
to life imprisonment and is not eligible for suspension of sentence, probation,
pardon or release from confinement on any basis except as specifically authorized
by section 31-233, subsection A or B until the person has served not
fewer than thirty-five years or the sentence is commuted.
M. Notwithstanding chapter 10 of this title, a
person who is at least eighteen years of age or who has been tried as an adult
and who is convicted of a dangerous crime against children in the second degree
pursuant to subsection B, C, E, or F
or I of this section is guilty of a class 3 felony and if the person is
sentenced to a term of imprisonment, the term of imprisonment is as follows and
the person is not eligible for release from confinement on any basis except as
specifically authorized by section 31-233, subsection A or B until the
person has served the sentence imposed by the court, the person is eligible for
release pursuant to section 41-1604.07 or the sentence is commuted: 
Minimum Presumptive Maximum
5 years 10 years 15
years
N. A person who is convicted of any dangerous crime
against children in the second degree and who has been previously convicted of
one or more predicate felonies is not eligible for suspension of sentence,
probation, pardon or release from confinement on any basis except as
specifically authorized by section 31-233, subsection A or B until the
sentence imposed by the court has been served, the person is eligible for
release pursuant to section 41-1604.07 or the sentence is commuted.
O. Section 13-704, subsection J and section 13-707,
subsection B apply to the determination of prior convictions.
P. The sentence imposed on a person by the court for
a dangerous crime against children under subsection H of this section involving
sexual abuse may be served concurrently with other sentences if the offense
involved only one victim. The sentence imposed on a person for any
other dangerous crime against children in the first or second degree shall be
consecutive to any other sentence imposed on the person at any time, including
sexual abuse of the same victim.
Q. In this section, for purposes of punishment an
unborn child shall be treated like a minor who is under twelve years of age.
R. A dangerous crime against children is in the
first degree if it is a completed offense and is in the second degree if it is
a preparatory offense, except attempted first degree murder is a dangerous
crime against children in the first degree.
S. It is not a defense to a dangerous crime against
children that the minor is a person posing as a minor or is otherwise
fictitious if the defendant knew or had reason to know the purported minor was
under fifteen years of age.
T. For the purposes of this section:
1. "Dangerous crime against children"
means any of the following that is committed against a minor who is under
fifteen years of age:
(a) Second degree murder.
(b) Aggravated assault resulting in serious physical
injury or involving the discharge, use or threatening exhibition of a deadly
weapon or dangerous instrument.
(c) Sexual assault.
(d) Molestation of a child.
(e) Sexual conduct with a minor.
(f) Commercial sexual exploitation of a minor.
(g) Sexual exploitation of a minor.
(h) Child abuse as prescribed in section 13-3623,
subsection A, paragraph 1.
(i) Kidnapping.
(j) Sexual abuse.
(k) Taking a child for the purpose of prostitution
as prescribed in section 13-3206.
(l) Child sex trafficking as prescribed in section
13-3212.
(m) Involving or using minors in drug offenses.
(n) Continuous sexual abuse of a child.
(o) Attempted first degree murder.
(p) Sex trafficking.
(q) Manufacturing methamphetamine under
circumstances that cause physical injury to a minor.
(r) Bestiality as prescribed in section 13-1411,
subsection A, paragraph 2.
(s) Luring a minor for sexual exploitation.
(t) Aggravated luring a minor for sexual
exploitation.
(u) Unlawful age misrepresentation.
(v) Unlawful mutilation.
(w) Sexual extortion as
prescribed in section 13-1428.
(x) Unlawful exposure to an adult oriented performance or
adult oriented business pursuant to section 13-3508.
2. "Predicate felony" means any felony involving
child abuse pursuant to section 13-3623, subsection A, paragraph 1, a
sexual offense, conduct involving the intentional or knowing infliction of
serious physical injury or the discharge, use or threatening exhibition of a
deadly weapon or dangerous instrument, or a dangerous crime against children in
the first or second degree. END_STATUTE 
Sec. 5. Section 13-1425, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:
START_STATUTE13-1425. Unlawful disclosure of images depicting states of nudity or
specific sexual activities; classification; definitions
A. It is unlawful for a person to intentionally
disclose an image of another person who is identifiable from the image itself
or from information displayed in connection with the image if all of the
following apply:
1. The person in the image is depicted in a state of
nudity or is engaged in specific sexual activities.
2. The depicted person has a reasonable expectation
of privacy. Evidence that a person has sent an image to another person using
an electronic device does not, on its own, remove the person's reasonable
expectation of privacy for that image.
3. The image is disclosed with the intent to harm,
harass, intimidate, threaten or coerce the depicted person.
B. This section does not apply to any of the
following:
1. The reporting of unlawful conduct.
2. Lawful and common practices of law enforcement,
criminal reporting, legal proceedings or medical treatment.
3. Images involving voluntary exposure in a public
or commercial setting.
4. An interactive computer service, as defined in 47
United States Code section 230(f)(2), or an information service, as defined in
47 United States Code section 153, with regard to content wholly provided by
another party.
5. Any disclosure that is made with the consent of
the person who is depicted in the image.
C. A violation of this section is a class 5 felony,
except that a violation of this section is a:
1. Class 4 felony if the image is disclosed by
electronic means.
2. Class 1 misdemeanor if a person threatens to
disclose but does not disclose an image that if disclosed would be a violation
of this section.
D. For the purposes of this section: 
1. "Disclose" means display, distribute,
publish, advertise or offer.
2. "Disclosed by electronic means" means
delivery to an email address, mobile device, tablet or other electronic device
and includes disclosure on a website.
3. "Harm" means physical injury, financial
injury or serious emotional distress.
4. "Image" means a photograph, videotape,
film or digital recording.
5. "Reasonable expectation of privacy"
means the person exhibits an actual expectation of privacy and the expectation
is reasonable.
6. "Specific sexual activities" has the
same meaning prescribed in section 11-811, subsection E, paragraph 18 19, subdivisions (a) and (b).
7. "State of nudity" has the same meaning
prescribed in section 11-811, subsection E, paragraph 14 15, subdivision (a). END_STATUTE
Sec. 6. Title 13, chapter 35, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended by adding section 13-3508, to read:
START_STATUTE13-3508. Unlawful exposure to an adult oriented performance or business;
minors; classification; definitions
A. A person commits unlawful exposure
to an adult oriented performance or adult oriented business by knowingly doing
any of the following: 
1. Allowing a minor under the
person's custody or control to view an adult oriented performance or enter an
adult oriented business.
2. Allowing a minor to enter or
remain in an adult oriented business or a building or part of a building WHERE
an adult oriented performance is occurring. 
3. Performing or allowing another
person to perform an adult oriented performance if a minor is present.
B. Unlawful exposure to an adult
oriented performance or business is a class 4 felony and if the minor is under
fifteen years of age it is punishable pursuant to section 13-705.
C. For the purposes of this section:
1. "Adult oriented
business" has the same meaning prescribed in section 11-811.
2. "adult oriented performance"
means a show or performance, with or without consideration, that includes any
of the following:
(a) a Person
who appears in a state of nudity or who is seminude.
(b) A person
whose performance is characterized by the exposure of specific anatomical areas
or specific sexual activities.
(c) A
performance that is harmful to minors.
3. "Harmful to minors" has
the same meaning prescribed in section 13-3501. END_STATUTE
Sec. 7. Section 13-3620, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:
START_STATUTE13-3620. Duty to report abuse, physical injury, neglect and denial or
deprivation of medical or surgical care or nourishment of minors; medical
records; exception; violation; classification; definitions
A. Any person who reasonably believes that a minor
is or has been the victim of physical injury, abuse, child abuse, a reportable
offense or neglect that appears to have been inflicted on the minor by other
than accidental means or that is not explained by the available medical history
as being accidental in nature or who reasonably believes there has been a
denial or deprivation of necessary medical treatment or surgical care or
nourishment with the intent to cause or allow the death of an infant who is
protected under section 36-2281 shall immediately report or cause reports
to be made of this information to a peace officer, to the department of child
safety or to a tribal law enforcement or social services agency for any Indian
minor who resides on an Indian reservation, except if the report concerns a
person who does not have care, custody or control of the minor, the report
shall be made to a peace officer only. A member of the clergy, a
Christian Science practitioner or a priest who has received a confidential
communication or a confession in that person's role as a member of the clergy,
as a Christian Science practitioner or as a priest in the course of the
discipline enjoined by the church to which the member of the clergy, the
Christian Science practitioner or the priest belongs may withhold reporting of
the communication or confession if the member of the clergy, the Christian
Science practitioner or the priest determines that it is reasonable and
necessary within the concepts of the religion. This exemption applies only to
the communication or confession and not to personal observations the member of
the clergy, the Christian Science practitioner or the priest may otherwise make
of the minor. For the purposes of this subsection,
"person" means:
1. Any physician, physician's assistant,
optometrist, dentist, osteopathic physician, chiropractor, podiatrist,
behavioral health professional, nurse, psychologist, counselor or social worker
who develops the reasonable belief in the course of treating a patient.
2. Any peace officer, child welfare investigator,
child safety worker, member of the clergy, priest or Christian Science
practitioner.
3. The parent, stepparent or guardian of the minor.
4. School personnel, domestic violence victim
advocates or sexual assault victim advocates who develop the reasonable belief
in the course of their employment.
5. Any other person who has responsibility for the
care or treatment of the minor.
6. Any person who is employed as the immediate or
next higher level supervisor to or administrator of a person who is listed in
paragraph 1, 2, 4 or 5 of this subsection and who develops the reasonable
belief in the course of the supervisor's or administrator's employment, except
that if the supervisor or administrator reasonably believes that the report has
been made by a person who is required to report pursuant to paragraph 1, 2, 4
or 5 of this subsection, the supervisor or administrator is not required to
report pursuant to this paragraph.
B. A report is not required under this section
either:
1. For conduct prescribed by sections 13-1404
and 13-1405 if the conduct involves only minors who are fourteen,
fifteen, sixteen or seventeen years of age and there is nothing to indicate
that the conduct is other than consensual.
2. If a minor is of elementary school age, the
physical injury occurs accidentally in the course of typical playground
activity during a school day, occurs on the premises of the school that the
minor attends and is reported to the legal parent or guardian of the minor and
the school maintains a written record of the incident.
C. If a physician, psychologist or behavioral health
professional receives a statement from a person other than a parent,
stepparent, guardian or custodian of the minor during the course of providing
sex offender treatment that is not court ordered or that does not occur while
the offender is incarcerated in the state department of corrections or the department
of juvenile corrections, the physician, psychologist or behavioral health
professional may withhold the reporting of that statement if the physician,
psychologist or behavioral health professional determines it is reasonable and
necessary to accomplish the purposes of the treatment.
D. Reports shall be made immediately either
electronically or by telephone. The reports shall contain the
following information, if known:
1. The names and addresses of the minor and the
minor's parents or the person or persons having custody of the minor.
2. The minor's age and the nature and extent of the
minor's abuse, child abuse, physical injury or neglect, including any evidence
of previous abuse, child abuse, physical injury or neglect.
3. Any other information that the person believes
might be helpful in establishing the cause of the abuse, child abuse, physical
injury or neglect.
E. A health care professional who is regulated
pursuant to title 32 and who, after a routine newborn physical assessment of a
newborn infant's health status or following notification of positive toxicology
screens of a newborn infant, reasonably believes that the newborn infant may be
affected by the presence of alcohol or a drug listed in section 13-3401
shall immediately report this information, or cause a report to be made, to the
department of child safety. For the purposes of this subsection, "newborn
infant" means a newborn infant who is under thirty days of age.
F. Any person other than one required to report or
cause reports to be made under subsection A of this section who reasonably
believes that a minor is or has been a victim of abuse, child abuse, physical
injury, a reportable offense or neglect may report the information to a peace
officer or to the department of child safety, except if the report concerns a
person who does not have care, custody or control of the minor, the report
shall be made to a peace officer only.
G. A person who has custody or control of medical
records of a minor for whom a report is required or authorized under this
section shall make the records, or a copy of the records, available to a peace
officer, child welfare investigator or child safety worker investigating the
minor's neglect, child abuse, physical injury or abuse on written request for the
records signed by the peace officer, child welfare investigator or child safety
worker. Records disclosed pursuant to this subsection are
confidential and may be used only in a judicial or administrative proceeding or
investigation resulting from a report required or authorized under this
section.
H. When reports are received by a peace officer, the
officer shall immediately notify the department of child
safety. Notwithstanding any other statute, when the department
receives these reports, it shall immediately notify a peace officer in the
appropriate jurisdiction.
I. Any person who is required to receive reports
pursuant to subsection A of this section may take or cause to be taken
photographs of the minor and the vicinity involved. Medical examinations
of the involved minor may be performed.
J. A person who furnishes a report, information or
records required or authorized under this section, or a person who participates
in a judicial or administrative proceeding or investigation resulting from a
report, information or records required or authorized under this section, is
immune from any civil or criminal liability by reason of that action unless the
person acted with malice or unless the person has been charged with or is
suspected of abusing or neglecting the child or children in question.
K. Except for the attorney client privilege or the
privilege under subsection L of this section, no privilege applies to any:
1. Civil or criminal litigation or administrative
proceeding in which a minor's neglect, dependency, abuse, child abuse, physical
injury or abandonment is an issue.
2. Judicial or administrative proceeding resulting
from a report, information or records submitted pursuant to this section.
3. Investigation of a minor's child abuse, physical
injury, neglect or abuse conducted by a peace officer or the department of
child safety.
L. In any civil or criminal litigation in which a
child's neglect, dependency, physical injury, abuse, child abuse or abandonment
is an issue, a member of the clergy, a Christian Science practitioner or a
priest shall not, without his consent, be examined as a witness concerning any
confession made to him in his role as a member of the clergy, a Christian
Science practitioner or a priest in the course of the discipline enjoined by
the church to which he belongs. This subsection does not discharge a member of
the clergy, a Christian Science practitioner or a priest from the duty to
report pursuant to subsection A of this section.
M. If psychiatric records are requested pursuant to
subsection G of this section, the custodian of the records shall notify the
attending psychiatrist, who may excise from the records, before they are made
available:
1. Personal information about individuals other than
the patient.
2. Information regarding specific diagnosis or
treatment of a psychiatric condition, if the attending psychiatrist certifies
in writing that release of the information would be detrimental to the
patient's health or treatment.
N. If any portion of a psychiatric record is excised
pursuant to subsection M of this section, a court, on application of a peace
officer, child welfare investigator or child safety worker, may order that the
entire record or any portion of the record that contains information relevant
to the reported abuse, child abuse, physical injury or neglect be made
available to the peace officer, child welfare investigator or child safety
worker investigating the abuse, child abuse, physical injury or neglect.
O. A person who violates this section is guilty of a
class 1 misdemeanor, except if the failure to report involves a reportable
offense, the person is guilty of a class 6 felony.
P. For the purposes of this section:
1. "Abuse" has the same meaning prescribed
in section 8-201.
2. "Child abuse" means child abuse
pursuant to section 13-3623.
3. "Neglect" has the same meaning
prescribed in section 8-201.
4. "Reportable offense" means any of the
following:
(a) Any offense listed in chapters 14 and 35.1 of
this title or section sections 13-3506.01 and 13-3508.
(b) Surreptitious photographing, videotaping,
filming or digitally recording or viewing a minor pursuant to section 13-3019.
(c) Child sex trafficking pursuant to section 13-3212.
(d) Incest pursuant to section 13-3608.
(e) Unlawful mutilation pursuant to section 13-1214. END_STATUTE
Sec. 8. Section 13-3821, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:
START_STATUTE13-3821. Persons required to register; procedure; identification card;
assessment; definitions
A. A person who has been convicted of or adjudicated
guilty except insane for a violation or attempted violation of any of the
following offenses or who has been convicted of or adjudicated guilty except
insane or not guilty by reason of insanity for an offense committed in another
jurisdiction that if committed in this state would be a violation or attempted
violation of any of the following offenses or an offense that was in effect
before September 1, 1978 and that, if committed on or after September 1, 1978,
has the same elements of an offense listed in this section or who is required
to register by the convicting or adjudicating jurisdiction, within ten days
after the conviction or adjudication or within seventy-two hours,
excluding weekends and legal holidays, after entering and remaining for at
least seventy-two hours in any county of this state, shall register with
the sheriff of that county:
1. Unlawful imprisonment pursuant to section 13-1303
if the victim is under eighteen years of age and the unlawful imprisonment was
not committed by the child's parent.
2. Kidnapping pursuant to section 13-1304 if
the victim is under eighteen years of age and the kidnapping was not committed
by the child's parent.
3. Sexual abuse pursuant to section 13-1404 if
the victim is under eighteen years of age.
4. Sexual conduct with a minor pursuant to section
13-1405.
5. Sexual assault pursuant to section 13-1406.
6. Sexual assault of a spouse if the offense was
committed before August 12, 2005.
7. Molestation of a child pursuant to section 13-1410.
8. Continuous sexual abuse of a child pursuant to
section 13-1417.
9. Taking a child for the purpose of prostitution
pursuant to section 13-3206.
10. Child prostitution pursuant to section 13-3212,
subsection A or subsection B, paragraph 1 or 2 committed before August 9, 2017.
11. Child sex trafficking pursuant to section 13-3212,
subsection A or subsection B, paragraph 1 or 2 committed on or after August 9,
2017.
12. Commercial sexual exploitation of a minor
pursuant to section 13-3552.
13. Sexual exploitation of a minor pursuant to
section 13-3553.
14. Luring a minor for sexual exploitation pursuant
to section 13-3554.
15. A second or subsequent violation of indecent
exposure to a person who is under fifteen years of age pursuant to section 13-1402.
16. A second or subsequent violation of public
sexual indecency to a minor who is under fifteen years of age pursuant to
section 13-1403, subsection B.
17. A third or subsequent violation of indecent
exposure pursuant to section 13-1402.
18. A third or subsequent violation of public sexual
indecency pursuant to section 13-1403.
19. A violation of section 13-3822 or 13-3824.
20. Unlawful age misrepresentation.
21. Aggravated luring a minor for sexual
exploitation pursuant to section 13-3560.
22. Sexual extortion pursuant to section 13-1428
if the victim is under fifteen years of age.
23. Unlawful exposure to an adult
oriented performance or adult oriented business pursuant to section 13-3508.
B. Before the person is released from confinement
the state department of corrections in conjunction with the department of
public safety and each county sheriff shall complete the registration of any
person who was convicted of or adjudicated guilty except insane for a violation
of any offense listed under subsection A of this section. Within three days
after the person's release from confinement, the state department of
corrections shall forward the registered person's records to the department of
public safety and to the sheriff of the county in which the registered person
intends to reside. Registration pursuant to this subsection shall be
consistent with subsection E of this section.
C. Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, the
judge who sentences a defendant for any violation of chapter 14 or 35.1 of this
title or for an offense for which there was a finding of sexual motivation
pursuant to section 13-118 may require the person who committed the
offense to register pursuant to this section.
D. The court may require a person who has been
adjudicated delinquent for an act that would constitute an offense specified in
subsection A or C of this section to register pursuant to this section. Any
duty to register under this subsection shall terminate terminates when the person reaches twenty-five years of
age.
E. A person who has been convicted, adjudicated
guilty except insane or adjudicated delinquent and who is required to register
in the convicting or adjudicating state for an act that would constitute an
offense specified in subsection A or C of this section and who is not a
resident of this state shall be required to register pursuant to this section
if the person is either:
1. Employed full-time or part-time in
this state, with or without compensation, for more than fourteen consecutive
days or for an aggregate period of more than thirty days in a calendar year.
2. Enrolled as a full-time or part-time
student in any school in this state for more than fourteen consecutive days or
for an aggregate period of more than thirty days in a calendar year. For
the purposes of this paragraph, "school" means an educational
institution of any description, public or private, wherever located in this
state.
F. Any duty to register under subsection D or E of
this section for a juvenile adjudication terminates when the person reaches
twenty-five years of age. 
G. The court may order the termination of any duty
to register under this section on successful completion of probation if the
person was under eighteen years of age when the offense for which the person
was convicted or adjudicated guilty except insane was committed.
H. The court may order the suspension or termination
of any duty to register under this section after a hearing held pursuant to
section 13-923.
I. At the time of registering, the person shall sign
or affix an electronic fingerprint to a statement giving such information as
required by the director of the department of public safety, including all
names by which the person is known, any required online identifier, the name of
any website or internet communication service where the identifier is being
used and, if the person owns, possesses or regularly operates a motor vehicle
that is required to be registered under title 28, chapter 7, the make, model,
year of manufacture, color, vehicle identification number, state of
registration and license plate number of the motor vehicle. The
sheriff shall fingerprint and photograph the person and within three days
thereafter shall send copies of the statement, fingerprints and photographs to
the department of public safety and the chief of police, if any, of the place
where the person resides. The information that is required by this
subsection shall include the physical location of the person's residence, the
person's address and whether the person's residence is permanent or
temporary. If the person has a place of residence that is different
from the person's address, the person shall provide the person's address, the
physical location of the person's residence and the name of the owner of the residence
if the residence is privately owned and not offered for rent or lease. If the
person receives mail at a post office box or other place, the person shall
provide the location and number of the post office box or other place. If the
person has more than one residence, the person shall register in person and in
writing every residence and address not less than every ninety days with the
sheriff in whose jurisdiction the person is physically present. If
the person does not have an address or a permanent place of residence, the
person shall provide a description and physical location of any temporary
residence and shall register as a transient not less than every ninety days
with the sheriff in whose jurisdiction the transient is physically present.
J. On the person's initial registration and every
year after the person's initial registration during the month of the person's
birthdate, the person shall report in person to the sheriff of the county in
which the person is registered and confirm in writing all information required
by this section, any required online identifier and the name of any website or
internet communication service where the identifier is being used and the
person shall obtain a new nonoperating identification license or a driver license
from the motor vehicle division in the department of transportation and shall
carry a valid nonoperating identification license or a driver
license. Notwithstanding sections 28-3165 and 28-3171,
the license is valid for one year from the date of issuance, and the person
shall submit to the department of transportation proof of the person's address
and place of residence. The motor vehicle division shall annually
update the person's address and photograph and shall make a copy of the photograph
available to the department of public safety or to any law enforcement
agency. The motor vehicle division shall provide to the department
of public safety daily address updates for persons required to register
pursuant to this section.
K. Except as provided in subsection E or L of this
section, the clerk of the superior court in the county in which a person has
been convicted of or adjudicated guilty except insane for a violation of any
offense listed under subsection A of this section or has been ordered to
register pursuant to subsection C or D of this section shall notify the sheriff
in that county of the conviction or adjudication within ten days after entry of
the judgment.
L. Within ten days after entry of judgment, a court
not of record shall notify the arresting law enforcement agency of an
offender's conviction of or adjudication of guilty except insane for a
violation of section 13-1402. Within ten days after receiving
this information, the law enforcement agency shall determine if the offender is
required to register pursuant to this section. If the law
enforcement agency determines that the offender is required to register, the
law enforcement agency shall provide the information required by section 13-3825
to the department of public safety and shall make community notification as
required by law.
M. A person who is required to register pursuant to
this section because of a conviction or adjudication of guilty except insane
for the unlawful imprisonment of a minor or the kidnapping of a minor is
required to register, absent additional or subsequent convictions or
adjudications, for a period of ten years from the date that the person is
released from prison, jail, probation, community supervision or parole and the
person has fulfilled all restitution obligations. Notwithstanding
this subsection, a person who has a prior conviction or adjudication of guilty
except insane for an offense for which registration is required pursuant to
this section is required to register for life.
N. A person who is required to register pursuant to
this section and who is a student at a public or private institution of
postsecondary education or who is employed, with or without compensation, at a
public or private institution of postsecondary education or who carries on a
vocation at a public or private institution of postsecondary education shall
notify the county sheriff having jurisdiction of the institution of
postsecondary education. The person who is required to register pursuant to
this section shall also notify the sheriff of each change in enrollment or
employment status at the institution.
O. At the time of registering, the sheriff shall
secure a sufficient sample of blood or other bodily substances for
deoxyribonucleic acid testing and extraction from a person who has been
convicted of or adjudicated guilty except insane for an offense committed in
another jurisdiction that if committed in this state would be a violation or
attempted violation of any of the offenses listed in subsection A of this
section or an offense that was in effect before September 1, 1978 and that, if
committed on or after September 1, 1978, has the same elements of an offense
listed in subsection A of this section or who is required to register by the
convicting or adjudicating jurisdiction. The sheriff shall transmit
the sample to the department of public safety.
P. Any person who is required to register under
subsection A of this section shall register the person's required online
identifier and the name of any website or internet communication service where
the identifier is being used or is intended to be used with the sheriff from
and after December 31, 2007, regardless of whether the person was required to
register an identifier at the time of the person's initial registration under
this section.
Q. On conviction of or adjudication of guilty except
insane for any offense for which a person is required to register pursuant to
this section, in addition to any other penalty prescribed by law, the court
shall order the person to pay an additional assessment of $250. This
assessment is not subject to any surcharge. The court shall transmit
the monies received pursuant to this section to the county treasurer. The
county treasurer shall transmit the monies received to the state treasurer. The
state treasurer shall deposit the monies received in the state general
fund. Notwithstanding any other law, the court shall not waive the
assessment imposed pursuant to this section.
R. A person who is required to register pursuant to
this section shall verify the person's residence and address if requested by
the department of public safety pursuant to section 13-3827, subsection
G.
S. For the purposes of this section:
1. "Address" means all locations at which
the person receives mail.
2. "Required online identifier" means any
electronic email address information or instant message, chat, social
networking or other similar internet communication name but does not include a
social security number, date of birth or pin number.
3. "Residence" means:
(a) The person's dwelling place, whether permanent
or temporary.
(b) If the person is transient and does not spend at
least three nights in any location or place within thirty days a thirty-day period, the geographical
geographic areas of the county where the person spends
the nights.
4. "Transient" means a person who does not
have a single and permanent dwelling place. END_STATUTE




 
88R10943 EAS-D


 


 

		By: Bumgarner
H.B. No. 2116




 


 



 		
			

A BILL TO BE ENTITLED




 
			

AN ACT




 
			
relating to psychological evaluations before the provision of 



 
			
gender reassignment treatments and procedures.



 
			
       BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF TEXAS:



 
			
       SECTION 1.  Chapter 161, Health and Safety Code, is amended 



 
			
by adding Subchapter X to read as follows:



 
			
SUBCHAPTER X.  PSYCHOLOGICAL EVALUATION REQUIRED FOR GENDER 



 
			
REASSIGNMENT TREATMENTS AND PROCEDURES



 
			
       Sec. 161.701.  DEFINITIONS.  In this subchapter:



 
			
             (1)  "Gender reassignment treatment or procedure" 



 
			
means a medical treatment or procedure provided or performed for 



 
			
the purpose of altering an individual's primary or secondary sex 



 
			
characteristics.



 
			
             (2)  "Health care provider" means an individual who is 



 
			
licensed, certified, or otherwise authorized by this state's laws 



 
			
to provide or render health care or to dispense or prescribe a 



 
			
prescription drug in the ordinary course of business or practice of 



 
			
a profession.



 
			
       Sec. 161.702.  PSYCHOLOGICAL EXAMINATION REQUIRED FOR 



 
			
GENDER REASSIGNMENT TREATMENTS AND PROCEDURES.  A health care 



 
			
provider may not provide or perform a gender reassignment treatment 



 
			
or procedure unless the person receiving the gender reassignment 



 
			
treatment or procedure has undergone a psychological examination by 



 
			
a psychologist licensed in this state.



 
			
       SECTION 2.  Subchapter X, Chapter 161, Health and Safety 



 
			
Code, as added by this Act, applies only to a gender reassignment 



 
			
treatment or procedure that is provided or performed on or after the 



 
			
effective date of this Act.



 
			
       SECTION 3.  This Act takes effect September 1, 2023.





 
88R2452 SRA-D


 


 

		By: Shaheen
H.B. No. 708




 


 



 		
			

A BILL TO BE ENTITLED




 
			

AN ACT




 
			
relating to the definition of sexually oriented business.



 
			
       BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF TEXAS:



 
			
       SECTION 1.  Section 102.051, Business & Commerce Code, is 



 
			
amended to read as follows:



 
			
       Sec. 102.051.  DEFINITIONS.  In this subchapter:



 
			
             (1)  "Drag performance" has the meaning assigned by 



 
			
Section 243.002, Local Government Code.



 
			
             (1-a) "Nude" means:



 
			
                   (A)  entirely unclothed; or



 
			
                   (B)  clothed in a manner that leaves uncovered or 



 
			
visible through less than fully opaque clothing any portion of the 



 
			
breasts below the top of the areola of the breasts, if the person is 



 
			
female, or any portion of the genitals or buttocks.



 
			
             (2)  "Sexually oriented business" means a nightclub, 



 
			
bar, restaurant, or similar commercial enterprise that:



 
			
                   (A)  provides for an audience of two or more 



 
			
individuals:



 
			
                         (i)  live nude entertainment or live nude 



 
			
performances; or



 
			
                         (ii)  a drag performance; and



 
			
                   (B)  authorizes on-premises consumption of 



 
			
alcoholic beverages, regardless of whether the consumption of 



 
			
alcoholic beverages is under a license or permit issued under the 



 
			
Alcoholic Beverage Code.



 
			
       SECTION 2.  Section 243.002, Local Government Code, is 



 
			
amended to read as follows:



 
			
       Sec. 243.002.  DEFINITIONS [DEFINITION].  In this chapter:



 
			
             (1)  "Drag performance" means a performance in which a 



 
			
performer exhibits a gender identity that is different than the 



 
			
performer's gender assigned at birth using clothing, makeup, or 



 
			
other physical markers and sings, lip syncs, dances, or otherwise 



 
			
performs before an audience for entertainment.



 
			
             (2)  "Sexually [, "sexually] oriented business" means:



 
			
                   (A)  a sex parlor, nude studio, modeling studio, 



 
			
love parlor, adult bookstore, adult movie theater, adult video 



 
			
arcade, adult movie arcade, adult video store, adult motel, or 



 
			
other commercial enterprise the primary business of which is the 



 
			
offering of a service or the selling, renting, or exhibiting of 



 
			
devices or any other items intended to provide sexual stimulation 



 
			
or sexual gratification to the customer; or



 
			
                   (B)  a nightclub, bar, restaurant, or other 



 
			
commercial enterprise that provides for an audience of two or more 



 
			
individuals a drag performance.



 
			
       SECTION 3.  This Act takes effect September 1, 2023.





House
File
8
-
Introduced


HOUSE
FILE
8


BY
WHEELER
,
HOLT
,
STONE
,


DUNWELL
,
MOMMSEN
,
COLLINS
,


FISHER
,
GUSTOFF
,
JENEARY
,


VONDRAN
,
WULF
,
BRADLEY
,


MEGGERS
,
KNIFF
MCCULLA
,


GOLDING
,
DEYOE
,
GRABER
,


P.
THOMPSON
,
WILLS
,


GUSTAFSON
,
JOHNSON
,
BODEN
,


HARRIS
,
KAUFMANN
,
FRY
,


NORDMAN
,
YOUNG
,
HENDERSON
,


HORA
,
WOOD
,
OSMUNDSON
,


WINDSCHITL
,
GRASSLEY
,
and


GERHOLD


A
BILL
FOR


An
Act
prohibiting
instruction
related
to
gender
identity
and
1


sexual
orientation
in
school
districts
and
charter
schools
2


in
kindergarten
through
grade
three.
3


BE
IT
ENACTED
BY
THE
GENERAL
ASSEMBLY
OF
THE
STATE
OF
IOWA:
4


TLSB
1684YH
(2)
90


jda/jh




H.F.
8


Section
1.
Section
256.11,
subsections
2
and
3,
Code
2023,
1


are
amended
to
read
as
follows:
2


2.
The
kindergarten
program
shall
include
experiences
3


designed
to
develop
healthy
emotional
and
social
habits
and
4


growth
in
the
language
arts
and
communication
skills,
as
well
5


as
a
capacity
for
the
completion
of
individual
tasks,
and
6


protect
and
increase
physical
well-being
with
attention
given
7


to
experiences
relating
to
the
development
of
life
skills
and
,


8


subject
to
section
279.77,
age-appropriate
and
research-based


9


human
growth
and
development.
A
kindergarten
teacher
shall
be
10


licensed
to
teach
in
kindergarten.
An
accredited
nonpublic
11


school
must
meet
the
requirements
of
this
subsection
only
if
12


the
nonpublic
school
offers
a
kindergarten
program
;
provided,


13


however,
that
section
279.77
shall
not
apply
to
a
nonpublic


14


school
.
15


3.
The
following
areas
shall
be
taught
in
grades
one
through
16


six:
English-language
arts,
social
studies,
mathematics,
17


science,
health,
age-appropriate
and
research-based


18


human
growth
and
development,


physical
education,
traffic
19


safety,
music,
and
visual
art
,
and,
subject
to
section
20


279.77,
age-appropriate
and
research-based
human
growth
and


21


development
.
Computer
science
instruction
incorporating
22


the
standards
established
under
section
256.7,
subsection
23


26
,
paragraph
“a”
,
subparagraph
(4),
shall
be
offered
in
24


at
least
one
grade
level
commencing
with
the
school
year
25


beginning
July
1,
2023.
The
health
curriculum
shall
include
26


the
characteristics
of
communicable
diseases
including
acquired
27


immune
deficiency
syndrome.
The
state
board
as
part
of
28


accreditation
standards
shall
adopt
curriculum
definitions
for
29


implementing
the
elementary
program.
30


Sec.
2.
Section
256E.7,
subsection
2,
Code
2023,
is
amended
31


by
adding
the
following
new
paragraph:
32


NEW
PARAGRAPH


.
0j.
Be
subject
to
and
comply
with
the
33


requirements
of
section
279.77
relating
to
sexual
orientation
34


and
gender
identity
instruction
in
kindergarten
through
grade
35


-1-


LSB
1684YH
(2)
90


jda/jh


1/
3
















H.F.
8


three
in
the
same
manner
as
a
school
district.
1


Sec.
3.
Section
279.50,
subsections
1
and
2,
Code
2023,
are
2


amended
to
read
as
follows:
3


1.
Each


Subject
to
section
279.77,
each
school
board
shall
4


provide
instruction
in
kindergarten
which
gives
attention
5


to
experiences
relating
to
life
skills
and
human
growth
and
6


development
as
required
in
section
256.11
.
School
districts
7


shall
use
research
provided
in
section
256.9,
subsection
46
,
8


paragraph
“b”
,
to
evaluate
and
upgrade
their
instructional
9


materials
and
teaching
strategies
for
human
growth
and
10


development.
11


2.
Each
school
board
shall
provide
age-appropriate
and
12


research-based
instruction
in
human
growth
and
development
13


including
instruction
regarding
human
sexuality,
self-esteem,
14


stress
management,
interpersonal
relationships,
domestic
15


abuse,
HPV
and
the
availability
of
a
vaccine
to
prevent
HPV,
16


and
acquired
immune
deficiency
syndrome
as
required
in
section
17


256.11
,
in
grades
one


four
through
twelve.
18


Sec.
4.
Section
279.50,
Code
2023,
is
amended
by
adding
the
19


following
new
subsection:
20


NEW
SUBSECTION


.
1A.
Subject
to
section
279.77,
each
21


school
board
shall
provide
age-appropriate
and
research-based
22


instruction
in
human
growth
and
development
including
23


instruction
regarding
human
sexuality,
self-esteem,
stress
24


management,
interpersonal
relationships,
domestic
abuse,
HPV
25


and
the
availability
of
a
vaccine
to
prevent
HPV,
and
acquired
26


immune
deficiency
syndrome
as
required
in
section
256.11,
in
27


grades
one
through
three.
28


Sec.
5.
NEW
SECTION


.
279.77
Sexual
orientation
and
gender
29


identity
——
prohibited
instruction.
30


1.
As
used
in
this
section:


31


a.
“Gender
identity”
means
the
same
as
defined
in
section
32


216.2.


33


b.
“Sexual
orientation”
means
the
same
as
defined
in
section
34


216.2.


35


-2-


LSB
1684YH
(2)
90


jda/jh


2/
3










H.F.
8


2.
A
school
district
shall
not
provide
any
program,
1


curriculum,
material,
test,
survey,
questionnaire,
activity,
2


announcement,
promotion,
or
instruction
of
any
kind
relating
3


to
gender
identity
or
sexual
orientation
to
students
in
4


kindergarten
through
grade
three.
5


EXPLANATION
6


The
inclusion
of
this
explanation
does
not
constitute
agreement
with
7


the
explanation’s
substance
by
the
members
of
the
general
assembly.
8


This
bill
prohibits
instruction
related
to
gender
identity
9


and
sexual
orientation
in
school
districts
and
charter
schools
10


in
kindergarten
through
grade
three.
The
bill
makes
conforming
11


changes
to
Code
sections
256.11
(educational
standards)
and
12


279.50
(human
growth
and
development
instruction)
to
provide
13


that
the
human
growth
and
development
instruction
provided
to
14


students
in
kindergarten
through
grade
three
shall
not
include
15


any
program,
curriculum,
material,
test,
survey,
questionnaire,
16


activity,
announcement,
promotion,
or
instruction
of
any
kind
17


relating
to
gender
identity
or
sexual
orientation.
The
bill
18


defines
“gender
identity”
and
“sexual
orientation”.
19


The
bill
requires
the
human
growth
and
development
20


instruction
provided
in
the
kindergarten
program
to
be
both
21


age-appropriate
and
research-based.
22


-3-


LSB
1684YH
(2)
90


jda/jh


3/
3





 
88R527 MM-D


 


 

		By: Toth
H.B. No. 1541




 


 



 		
			

A BILL TO BE ENTITLED




 
			

AN ACT




 
			
relating to parental rights in public education and prohibiting 



 
			
certain instruction regarding sexual orientation or gender 



 
			
identity; authorizing a civil penalty.



 
			
       BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF TEXAS:



 
			
       SECTION 1.  Subchapter Z, Chapter 22, Education Code, is 



 
			
amended by adding Section 22.903 to read as follows:



 
			
       Sec. 22.903.  PROHIBITION ON RENEWAL OF EMPLOYMENT CONTRACT 



 
			
FOR CERTAIN MISCONDUCT.  A school district may not renew the 



 
			
employment contract for an individual who:



 
			
             (1)  prevents a parent from accessing written records 



 
			
concerning the parent's child in violation of Chapter 26; or



 
			
             (2)  discourages or prevents parental notification 



 
			
regarding a student's mental, emotional, or physical health or 



 
			
well-being in violation of Section 26.0083.



 
			
       SECTION 2.  Chapter 26, Education Code, is amended by adding 



 
			
Section 26.0083 to read as follows:



 
			
       Sec. 26.0083.  RIGHT TO INFORMATION REGARDING MENTAL, 



 
			
EMOTIONAL, AND PHYSICAL HEALTH; CIVIL ENFORCEMENT.  (a)  Each 



 
			
school district shall adopt a procedure for notifying the parent of 



 
			
a student enrolled in the district regarding any change in:



 
			
             (1)  services provided to or monitoring of the student 



 
			
related to the student's mental, emotional, or physical health or 



 
			
well-being; or



 
			
             (2)  the district's ability to provide a safe and 



 
			
supportive learning environment for the student. 



 
			
       (b)  A procedure adopted under Subsection (a) must reinforce 



 
			
the fundamental right of a parent to make decisions regarding the 



 
			
upbringing and control of the parent's child by requiring school 



 
			
district personnel to:



 
			
             (1)  encourage a student to discuss issues relating to 



 
			
the student's well-being with the student's parent; or



 
			
             (2)  facilitate a discussion described under 



 
			
Subdivision (1).



 
			
       (c)  A school district may not adopt a procedure or a student 



 
			
support form, including a student well-being questionnaire or 



 
			
health screening form, that:



 
			
             (1)  prohibits a district employee from notifying the 



 
			
parent of a student regarding:



 
			
                   (A)  information about the student's mental, 



 
			
emotional, or physical health or well-being; or



 
			
                   (B)  a change in services provided to or 



 
			
monitoring of the student related to the student's mental, 



 
			
emotional, or physical health or well-being; or



 
			
             (2)  encourages or has the effect of encouraging a 



 
			
student to withhold from the student's parent information described 



 
			
by Subdivision (1)(A).



 
			
       (d)  Subsections (b) and (c) do not require the disclosure of 



 
			
information to a parent if a reasonably prudent person would 



 
			
believe the disclosure is likely to result in the student suffering 



 
			
abuse or neglect, as those terms are defined by Section 261.001, 



 
			
Family Code.



 
			
       (e)  A school district employee may not discourage or 



 
			
prohibit parental knowledge of or involvement in critical decisions 



 
			
affecting a student's mental, emotional, or physical health or 



 
			
well-being.



 
			
       (f)  Any student support services training developed or 



 
			
provided by a school district to district employees must comply 



 
			
with any student services guidelines, standards, and frameworks 



 
			
established by the State Board of Education and the agency.



 
			
       (g)  A parent alleging a violation of this section may bring 



 
			
a civil action to obtain appropriate injunctive relief and 



 
			
declaratory relief. A court may award damages and shall award 



 
			
reasonable attorney's fees and court costs to a prevailing parent.



 
			
       (h)  A school district whose employee violates this section 



 
			
is liable to the state for a civil penalty in an amount not to exceed 



 
			
$10,000 for each violation. The attorney general may investigate 



 
			
any alleged violation of this section and may sue to collect the 



 
			
civil penalty described by this subsection.



 
			
       (i)  A suit or petition under Subsection (h) may be filed in a 



 
			
district court in:



 
			
             (1)  Travis County; or



 
			
             (2)  a county in which the principal office of the 



 
			
school district is located.



 
			
       (j)  The attorney general may recover reasonable expenses 



 
			
incurred in obtaining relief under this section, including court 



 
			
costs, reasonable attorney's fees, investigative costs, witness 



 
			
fees, and deposition costs.



 
			
       (k)  Sovereign immunity to suit is waived and abolished to 



 
			
the extent of liability created by this section.



 
			
       (l)  This section may not be construed to limit or alter the 



 
			
requirements of Section 38.004 of this code or Chapter 261, Family 



 
			
Code.



 
			
       (m)  As soon as practicable after the effective date of this 



 
			
Act, the agency, the State Board of Education, and the State Board 



 
			
for Educator Certification, as appropriate, shall review and revise 



 
			
as necessary the following to ensure compliance with this section:



 
			
             (1)  school counseling frameworks and standards;



 
			
             (2)  educator practices and professional conduct 



 
			
principles; and



 
			
             (3)  any other student services personnel guidelines, 



 
			
standards, or frameworks.



 
			
       (n)  Subsection (m) and this subsection expire September 1, 



 
			
2025.



 
			
       SECTION 3.  Subchapter A, Chapter 28, Education Code, is 



 
			
amended by adding Section 28.0043 to read as follows:



 
			
       Sec. 28.0043.  RESTRICTION ON INSTRUCTION REGARDING SEXUAL 



 
			
ORIENTATION AND GENDER IDENTITY.  (a)  In this section, 



 
			
"age-appropriate" means suitable for particular ages or age groups 



 
			
of children or adolescents of the same chronological age or level of 



 
			
maturity, based on the development of cognitive, emotional, 



 
			
physical, and behavioral capacity that is typical for the age or age 



 
			
group.



 
			
       (b)  A school district, open-enrollment charter school, or 



 
			
district or charter school employee may not provide or allow a third 



 
			
party to provide instruction regarding sexual orientation or gender 



 
			
identity:



 
			
             (1)  to students enrolled in prekindergarten through 



 
			
eighth grade; or



 
			
             (2)  in a manner that is not age-appropriate or 



 
			
developmentally appropriate.



 
			
       SECTION 4.  Section 12.104(b), Education Code, as amended by 



 
			
Chapters 542 (S.B. 168), 887 (S.B. 1697), 915 (H.B. 3607), 974 (S.B. 



 
			
2081), and 1046 (S.B. 1365), Acts of the 87th Legislature, Regular 



 
			
Session, 2021, is reenacted and amended to read as follows:



 
			
       (b)  An open-enrollment charter school is subject to:



 
			
             (1)  a provision of this title establishing a criminal 



 
			
offense;



 
			
             (2)  the provisions in Chapter 554, Government Code; 



 
			
and



 
			
             (3)  a prohibition, restriction, or requirement, as 



 
			
applicable, imposed by this title or a rule adopted under this 



 
			
title, relating to:



 
			
                   (A)  the Public Education Information Management 



 
			
System (PEIMS) to the extent necessary to monitor compliance with 



 
			
this subchapter as determined by the commissioner;



 
			
                   (B)  criminal history records under Subchapter C, 



 
			
Chapter 22;



 
			
                   (C)  reading instruments and accelerated reading 



 
			
instruction programs under Section 28.006;



 
			
                   (D)  accelerated instruction under Section 



 
			
28.0211;



 
			
                   (E)  high school graduation requirements under 



 
			
Section 28.025;



 
			
                   (F)  special education programs under Subchapter 



 
			
A, Chapter 29;



 
			
                   (G)  bilingual education under Subchapter B, 



 
			
Chapter 29;



 
			
                   (H)  prekindergarten programs under Subchapter E 



 
			
or E-1, Chapter 29, except class size limits for prekindergarten 



 
			
classes imposed under Section 25.112, which do not apply;



 
			
                   (I)  extracurricular activities under Section 



 
			
33.081;



 
			
                   (J)  discipline management practices or behavior 



 
			
management techniques under Section 37.0021;



 
			
                   (K)  health and safety under Chapter 38;



 
			
                   (L)  the provisions of Subchapter A, Chapter 39;



 
			
                   (M)  public school accountability and special 



 
			
investigations under Subchapters A, B, C, D, F, G, and J, Chapter 



 
			
39, and Chapter 39A;



 
			
                   (N)  the requirement under Section 21.006 to 



 
			
report an educator's misconduct;



 
			
                   (O)  intensive programs of instruction under 



 
			
Section 28.0213;



 
			
                   (P)  the right of a school employee to report a 



 
			
crime, as provided by Section 37.148;



 
			
                   (Q)  bullying prevention policies and procedures 



 
			
under Section 37.0832;



 
			
                   (R)  the right of a school under Section 37.0052 



 
			
to place a student who has engaged in certain bullying behavior in a 



 
			
disciplinary alternative education program or to expel the student;



 
			
                   (S)  the right under Section 37.0151 to report to 



 
			
local law enforcement certain conduct constituting assault or 



 
			
harassment;



 
			
                   (T)  a parent's right to information regarding the 



 
			
provision of assistance for learning difficulties to the parent's 



 
			
child as provided by Sections 26.004(b)(11) and 26.0081(c) and (d);



 
			
                   (U)  establishment of residency under Section 



 
			
25.001;



 
			
                   (V)  school safety requirements under Sections 



 
			
37.108, 37.1081, 37.1082, 37.109, 37.113, 37.114, 37.1141, 37.115, 



 
			
37.207, and 37.2071;



 
			
                   (W)  the early childhood literacy and mathematics 



 
			
proficiency plans under Section 11.185;



 
			
                   (X)  the college, career, and military readiness 



 
			
plans under Section 11.186; [and]



 
			
                   (Y) [(X)]  parental options to retain a student 



 
			
under Section 28.02124;



 
			
                   (Z)  parental rights to information regarding a 



 
			
student's mental, emotional, and physical health offered by the 



 
			
school as provided by Section 26.0083, including the authorization 



 
			
of a civil suit and a civil penalty under that section; and



 
			
                   (AA)  the renewal of the employment contract of an 



 
			
employee who violates certain parental rights as provided by 



 
			
Section 22.903.



 
			
       SECTION 5.  This Act applies beginning with the 2023-2024 



 
			
school year.



 
			
       SECTION 6.  To the extent of any conflict, this Act prevails 



 
			
over another Act of the 88th Legislature, Regular Session, 2023, 



 
			
relating to nonsubstantive additions to and corrections in enacted 



 
			
codes.



 
			
       SECTION 7.  This Act takes effect immediately if it receives 



 
			
a vote of two-thirds of all the members elected to each house, as 



 
			
provided by Section 39, Article III, Texas Constitution.  If this 



 
			
Act does not receive the vote necessary for immediate effect, this 



 
			
Act takes effect September 1, 2023.





MISSISSIPPI LEGISLATURE
2023 Regular Session
To: Public Health and Human Services
By: Representatives Currie, Arnold, Boyd (19th), Calvert,
Carpenter, Creekmore IV, Darnell, Ford (54th), Hale, Lancaster, Mangold,
Morgan, Pigott, Shanks, Turner, Wallace, Williamson
House Bill 1127
AN ACT TO BE KNOWN AS THE MISSISSIPPI SAVE ADOLESCENTS FROM
EXPERIMENTATION (SAFE) ACT; TO PROVIDE LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS REGARDING THE RISKS
OF GENDER TRANSITION PROCEDURES FOR MINORS; TO PROVIDE DEFINITIONS OF CERTAIN
TERMS; TO PROHIBIT PHYSICIANS AND OTHER HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONALS FROM
PROVIDING GENDER TRANSITION PROCEDURES TO ANY PERSON UNDER EIGHTEEN YEARS OF
AGE; TO PROHIBIT PHYSICIANS AND OTHER HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONALS FROM REFERRING
ANY PERSON UNDER EIGHTEEN YEARS OF AGE TO ANY HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONAL FOR
GENDER TRANSITION PROCEDURES; TO PROVIDE FOR CERTAIN EXCEPTIONS TO THOSE
PROHIBITIONS; TO PROHIBIT THE DIRECT OR INDIRECT USE, GRANT, PAYMENT OR
DISTRIBUTION OF PUBLIC FUNDS TO ANY ENTITY, ORGANIZATION OR INDIVIDUAL THAT
PROVIDES GENDER TRANSITION PROCEDURES TO A PERSON UNDER EIGHTEEN YEARS OF AGE;
TO PROVIDE THAT HEALTH CARE SERVICES FURNISHED IN A STATE OR LOCALLY-OWNED HEALTH
CARE FACILITY OR BY A PHYSICIAN OR OTHER HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONAL EMPLOYED BY THE
STATE OR LOCAL GOVERNMENT SHALL NOT INCLUDE GENDER TRANSITION PROCEDURES FOR A
PERSON UNDER EIGHTEEN YEARS OF AGE; TO PROVIDE THAT AMOUNTS PAID DURING A
TAXABLE YEAR FOR PROVISION OF GENDER TRANSITION PROCEDURES OR AS PREMIUMS FOR
HEALTH CARE COVERAGE THAT INCLUDES COVERAGE FOR GENDER TRANSITION PROCEDURES
ARE NOT DEDUCTIBLE UNDER THE STATE INCOME TAX LAWS; TO PROVIDE THAT ANY
REFERRAL FOR OR PROVISION OF GENDER TRANSITION PROCEDURES TO A PERSON UNDER
EIGHTEEN YEARS OF AGE BY A PHYSICIAN OR OTHER HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONAL IS
UNPROFESSIONAL CONDUCT AND IS SUBJECT TO DISCIPLINE BY THE APPROPRIATE
LICENSING ENTITY FOR THE HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONAL; TO AUTHORIZE THE ATTORNEY
GENERAL TO BRING AN ACTION TO ENFORCE COMPLIANCE WITH THIS ACT; TO CREATE NEW
SECTION 43-13-117.7, MISSISSIPPI CODE OF 1972, TO PROHIBIT THE DIVISION OF
MEDICAID FROM REIMBURSING OR PROVIDING COVERAGE FOR GENDER TRANSITION
PROCEDURES FOR A PERSON UNDER EIGHTEEN YEARS OF AGE; TO AMEND SECTION 83-9-22,
MISSISSIPPI CODE OF 1972, AND CREATE NEW SECTION 83-9-37, MISSISSIPPI CODE OF
1972, TO PROVIDE THAT A HEALTH BENEFIT PLAN UNDER AN INSURANCE POLICY OR OTHER
PLAN PROVIDING HEALTH CARE COVERAGE SHALL NOT INCLUDE REIMBURSEMENT FOR GENDER
TRANSITION PROCEDURES FOR A PERSON UNDER EIGHTEEN YEARS OF AGE, AND IS NOT
REQUIRED TO PROVIDE COVERAGE FOR GENDER TRANSITION PROCEDURES FOR A PERSON
UNDER EIGHTEEN YEARS OF AGE; TO AMEND SECTIONS 27-7-17, 73-15-29 AND 73-25-29,
MISSISSIPPI CODE OF 1972, TO CONFORM TO THE PROVISIONS OF THIS ACT; AND FOR
RELATED PURPOSES.
     BE IT ENACTED BY THE
LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF MISSISSIPPI:
     SECTION 1.  Title.
 This act shall be known and may be cited as the "Mississippi Save Adolescents
from Experimentation (SAFE) Act"
     SECTION 2.  Legislative
findings.  The Legislature finds that:
          (a)  Mississippi has a
compelling government interest in protecting the health and safety of its citizens,
especially vulnerable children;
          (b)  (i)  Only a small
percentage of the American population experiences distress at identifying with
their biological sex.
               (ii)  According to
the American Psychiatric Association, "For natal adult males, prevalence
ranges from 0.005% to 0.014%, and for natal females, from 0.002% to 0.003%.";
          (c)  For the small
percentage of children who are gender nonconforming or experience distress at
identifying with their biological sex, studies consistently demonstrate that
the majority come to identify with their biological sex in adolescence or
adulthood, thereby rendering most physiological interventions unnecessary;
          (d)  Furthermore,
scientific studies show that individuals struggling with distress at
identifying with their biological sex often have already experienced
psychopathology, which indicates these individuals should be encouraged to seek
mental health services to address comorbidities and underlying causes of their
distress before undertaking any hormonal or surgical intervention;
          (e)  Even among people
who have undergone inpatient gender reassignment procedures, suicide rates,
psychiatric morbidities, and mortality rates remain markedly elevated above the
background population;
          (f)  (i)  Some health care
providers are prescribing puberty blocking drugs, such as gonadotropin-releasing
hormone analogues, in order to delay the onset or progression of puberty in
children who experience distress at identifying with their biological sex.
               (ii)  The prescribing
of puberty-blocking drugs is being done despite the lack of any long-term
longitudinal studies evaluating the risks and benefits of using these drugs for
the treatment of such distress or gender transition;
          (g)  Health care
providers are also prescribing cross-sex hormones for children who experience
distress at identifying with their biological sex, despite the fact that no
randomized clinical trials have been conducted on the efficacy or safety of the
use of cross-sex hormones in adults or children for the purpose of treating
such distress or gender transition;
          (h)  The use of cross-sex
hormones comes with serious known risks, such as:
               (i)  For
biological females:
                    1.  Erythrocytosis,
which is an increase in red blood cells;
                    2.  Severe liver
dysfunction;
                    3.  Coronary
artery disease, including heart attacks;
                    4.  Cerebrovascular
disease, including strokes;
                    5.  Hypertension;
                    6.  Increased
risk of breast and uterine cancers; and
                    7.  Irreversible
infertility; and
               (ii)  For
biological males:
                    1. Thromboembolic
disease, including blood clots;
                    2.  Cholelithiasis,
including gallstones;
                    3.  Coronary
artery disease, including heart attacks;
                    4.  Macroprolactinoma,
which is a tumor of the pituitary gland;
                    5.  Cerebrovascular
disease, including strokes;
                    6.  Hypertriglyceridemia,
which is an elevated level of tryglycerides in the blood;
                    7.  Breast
cancer; and
                    8.  Irreversible
infertility;
          (i)  Genital and
nongenital gender reassignment surgeries are generally not recommended for
children, although evidence indicates referrals for children to have such
surgeries are becoming more frequent;
          (j)  (i)  Genital
gender reassignment surgery includes several irreversible invasive procedures
for males and females and involves the alteration of biologically healthy and
functional body parts.
               (ii)  For
biological males, surgery may involve:
                    1.  Genital
reconstruction including penectomy, which is the removal of the penis;
                    2.  Orchiectomy,
which is the removal of the testicles;
                    3.  Vaginoplasty,
which is the construction of a vagina-like structure, typically through a
penile inversion procedure;
                    4.  Clitoroplasty,
which is the construction of a clitoris-like structure; and
                    5.  Vulvoplasty,
which is the construction of a vulva-like structure.
               (iii)  For biological
females, surgery may involve:
                    1.  A
hysterectomy or oophorectomy;
                    2.  Reconstruction
of the urethra;
                    3.  Genital
reconstruction including metoidioplasty or phalloplasty, which is the
construction of a penis-like structure;
                    4.  Vaginectomy,
which is the removal of the vagina;
                    5.  Scrotoplasty,
which is the construction of a penis-like and scrotum-like structure; and
                    6.  Implantation
of erection or testicular prostheses;
          (k)  The complications,
risks, and long-term care concerns associated with genital gender reassignment
surgery for both males and females are numerous and complex;
          (l)  (i)  Nongenital
gender reassignment surgery includes various invasive procedures for males and
females and also involves the alteration or removal of biologically normal and
functional body parts.
               (ii)  For
biological males, this surgery may involve:
                    1.  Augmentation
mammoplasty;
                    2.  Facial
feminization surgery;
                    3.  Liposuction;
                    4.  Lipofilling;
                    5.  Voice
surgery;
                    6.  Thyroid
cartilage reduction;
                    7.  Gluteal
augmentation;
                    8.  Hair
reconstruction; and
                    9.  Other
aesthetic procedures.
               (iii)  For
biological females, this surgery may involve:
                    1.  A
subcutaneous mastectomy;
                    2.  Voice
surgery;
                    3.  Liposuction;
                    4.  Lipofilling;
                    5.  Pectoral
implants; and
                    6.  Other
aesthetic procedures;
          (m)  (i)  It is an
accepted principle of economics and public policy that when a service or
product is subsidized or reimbursed, demand for that service or product is
increased.
               (ii)  Between 2015
and 2016, gender reassignment surgeries increased by nearly twenty percent
(20%) in the United States;
          (n)  It is of grave
concern to the Legislature that the  medical community is allowing individuals
who experience distress at identifying with their biological sex to be subjects
of irreversible and drastic nongenital gender reassignment surgery and
irreversible, permanently sterilizing genital gender reassignment surgery,
despite the lack of studies showing that the benefits of such extreme
interventions outweigh the risks; and
          (o)  The risks of gender transition procedures far outweigh
any benefit at this stage of clinical study on these procedures.
     SECTION 3.  Definitions.
 As used in this act:
          (a)  "Biological
sex" means the biological indication of male and female in the context of
reproductive potential or capacity, such as sex chromosomes, naturally
occurring sex hormones, gonads, and nonambiguous internal and external
genitalia present at birth, without regard to an individual's psychological,
chosen, or subjective experience of gender;
          (b)  "Cross-sex
hormones" means:
               (i)  Testosterone
or other androgens given to biological females in amounts that are larger or
more potent than would normally occur naturally in healthy biological sex
females; and
               (ii)  Estrogen
given to biological males in amounts that are larger or more potent than would
normally occur naturally in healthy biological sex males;
          (c)  "Gender"
means the psychological, behavioral, social, and cultural aspects of being male
or female;
          (d)  "Gender
reassignment surgery" means any medical or surgical service that seeks to
surgically alter or remove healthy physical or anatomical characteristics or
features that are typical for the individual's biological sex, in order to
instill or create physiological or anatomical characteristics that resemble a
sex different from the individual's biological sex, including, without
limitation, genital or nongenital gender reassignment surgery performed for the
purpose of assisting an individual with a gender transition;
          (e)  "Gender
transition" means the process in which a person goes from identifying with
and living as a gender that corresponds to his or her biological sex to
identifying with and living as a gender different from his or her biological
sex, and may involve social, legal, or physical changes;
          (f)  (i)  "Gender
transition procedures" means any medical or surgical service, including,
without limitation, physician's services, inpatient and outpatient hospital
services, or prescribed drugs related to gender transition that seeks to:
                    1.  Alter or
remove physical or anatomical characteristics or features that are typical for
the individual's biological sex; or
                    2.  Instill
or create physiological or anatomical characteristics that resemble a sex
different from the individual's biological sex, including, without limitation,
medical services that provide puberty-blocking drugs, cross-sex hormones, or
other mechanisms to promote the development of feminizing or masculinizing
features in the opposite biological sex, or genital or nongenital gender
reassignment surgery performed for the purpose of assisting an individual with
a gender transition.
               (ii)  "Gender
transition procedures" do not include:
                    1.  Services
to persons born with a medically verifiable disorder of sex development,
including a person with external biological sex characteristics that are irresolvably
ambiguous, such as those born with forty-six (46) XX chromosomes with
virilization, forty-six (46) XY chromosomes with undervirilization, or having
both ovarian and testicular tissue;
                    2.  Services
provided when a physician has otherwise diagnosed a disorder of sexual
development that the physician has determined through genetic or biochemical
testing that the person does not have normal sex chromosome structure, sex
steroid hormone production, or sex steroid hormone action;
                    3.  The
treatment of any infection, injury, disease, or disorder that has been caused
by or exacerbated by the performance of gender transition procedures, whether
or not the gender transition procedure was performed in accordance with state
and federal law or whether not funding for the gender transition procedure is
permissible under this act; or
                    4.  Any
procedure undertaken because the individual suffers from a physical disorder,
physical injury, or physical illness that would, as certified by a physician,
place the individual in imminent danger of death or impairment of major bodily
function unless surgery is performed;
          (g)  "Genital
gender reassignment surgery" means a medical procedure performed for the
purpose of assisting an individual with a gender transition, including, without
limitation:
               (i)  Surgical
procedures such as penectomy, orchiectomy, vaginoplasty, clitoroplasty, or
vulvoplasty for biologically male patients or hysterectomy or ovariectomy for
biologically female patients;
               (ii)  Reconstruction
of the fixed part of the urethra with or without a metoidioplasty; or
               (iii)  Phalloplasty,
vaginectomy, scrotoplasty, or implantation of erection or testicular prostheses
for biologically female patients;
          (h)  "Health care
professional" a person who is licensed, certified, or otherwise authorized
by the laws of this state to administer health care in the ordinary course of
the practice of his or her profession;
          (i)  "Nongenital
gender reassignment surgery" means medical procedures performed for the
purpose of assisting an individual with a gender transition, including, without
limitation:
               (i)  Surgical
procedures for biologically male patients, such as augmentation mammoplasty, facial
feminization surgery, liposuction, lipofilling, voice surgery, thyroid
cartilage reduction, gluteal augmentation, hair reconstruction, or various
aesthetic procedures; or
               (ii)  Surgical
procedures for biologically female patients, such as subcutaneous mastectomy,
voice surgery, liposuction, lipofilling, pectoral implants, or various
aesthetic procedures;
          (j)  "Physician"
means a person who is licensed to practice medicine in this state;
          (k)  "Puberty-blocking
drugs" means gonadotropin-releasing hormone analogues or other synthetic
drugs used in biological males to stop luteinizing hormone secretion and
therefore testosterone secretion, or synthetic drugs used in biological females
which stop the production of estrogens and progesterone, when used to delay or
suppress pubertal development in children for the purpose of assisting an
individual with a gender transition; and
          (l)  "Public funds"
means state, county, or local government monies, in addition to any department,
agency, or instrumentality authorized or appropriated under state law or
derived from any fund in which such moneys are deposited.
     SECTION 4.  Prohibition
of gender transition procedures for minors.  (1)  A
physician or other health care professional shall not provide gender transition
procedures to any person under eighteen (18) years of age.
     (2)  A physician, or other health
care professional shall not refer any person under eighteen (18) years of age
to any health care professional for gender transition procedures.
     (3)  A physician or other
health care professional is not prohibited from providing any of the following
procedures which are not gender transition procedures to an person under
eighteen (18) years of age:
          (a)  Services to
persons born with a medically verifiable disorder of sex development, including
a person with external biological sex characteristics that are irresolvably
ambiguous, such as those born with forty-six (46) XX chromosomes with
virilization, forty-six (46) XY chromosomes with undervirilization, or having
both ovarian and testicular tissue;
          (b)  Services provided when
a physician has otherwise diagnosed a disorder of sexual development that the
physician has determined through genetic or biochemical testing that the person
does not have normal sex chromosome structure, sex steroid hormone production,
or sex steroid hormone action;
          (c)  The treatment of
any infection, injury, disease, or disorder that has been caused by or
exacerbated by the performance of gender transition procedures, whether or not
the gender transition procedure was performed in accordance with state and
federal law or whether not funding for the gender transition procedure is
permissible under this act; or
          (d)  Any procedure
undertaken because the person suffers from a physical disorder, physical
injury, or physical illness that would, as certified by a physician, place the person
in imminent danger of death or impairment of major bodily function unless
surgery is performed.
     SECTION 5.  Prohibition
on use of public funds or tax deduction for gender transition procedures.  (1)
 Public funds shall not be directly or indirectly used,
granted, paid, or distributed to any entity, organization, or individual that
provides gender transition procedures to a person under eighteen (18) years of
age.
     (2)  Health
care services furnished in the following situations shall not include gender
transition procedures for a person under eighteen (18) years of age:
          (a)  By or in a health care
facility owned by the state or a county or local government; or
          (b)  By a physician or
other health care professional employed by state or a county or local
government.
     (3)  Any
amount paid by an individual or an entity during a taxable year for provision
of gender transition procedures or as premiums for health care coverage that
includes coverage for gender transition procedures is not deductible under the state
income tax laws.
     SECTION 6.  Enforcement.
 (1)  Any referral for or provision of gender
transition procedures to a person under eighteen (18) years of age by a
physician or other health care professional is unprofessional conduct and is
subject to discipline by the appropriate licensing entity for the health care professional.
     (2)  A person may assert an
actual or threatened violation of this act as a claim or defense in a judicial
or administrative proceeding and obtain compensatory damages, injunctive
relief, declaratory relief, or any other appropriate relief.
     (3)  (a)  A person must
bring a claim for a violation of this act no later than two (2) years after the
day the cause of action accrues.
          (b)  A person under
eighteen (18) years of age may bring an action throughout their minority
through a parent or next friend, and may bring an action in their own name upon
reaching majority at any time from that point until twenty (20) years after
reaching the age of majority.
     (4)  Notwithstanding any
other provision of law, an action under this act may be commenced, and relief
may be granted, in a judicial proceeding without regard to whether the person
commencing the action has sought or exhausted available administrative remedies.
     (5)  In any action or
proceeding to enforce a provision of this act, a prevailing party who
establishes a violation of this act shall recover reasonable attorney's fees.
     (6)  (a)  The Attorney General may bring an action to enforce
compliance with this act.
          (b)  This act does not
deny, impair, or otherwise affect any right or authority of the Attorney
General, the State of Mississippi, or any agency, officer, or employee of the
state, acting under any law other than this act, to institute or intervene in
any proceeding.
     SECTION 7.  Section
27-7-17, Mississippi Code of 1972, is amended as follows:
     27-7-17.  In computing taxable
income, there shall be allowed as deductions:
     (1)  Business deductions.
          (a)  Business expenses. 
All the ordinary and necessary expenses paid or incurred during the taxable year
in carrying on any trade or business, including a reasonable allowance for salaries
or other compensation for personal services actually rendered; nonreimbursable traveling
expenses incident to current employment, including a reasonable amount expended
for meals and lodging while away from home in the pursuit of a trade or business;
and rentals or other payments required to be made as a condition of the continued
use or possession, for purposes of the trade or business of property to which the
taxpayer has not taken or is not taking title or in which he had no equity.  Expense
incurred in connection with earning and distributing nontaxable income is not an
allowable deduction.  Limitations on entertainment expenses shall conform to the
provisions of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.  There shall also be allowed a
deduction for expenses as provided in Section 41-137-51.
          (b)  Interest.  All
interest paid or accrued during the taxable year on business indebtedness, except
interest upon the indebtedness for the purchase of tax-free bonds, or any stocks,
the dividends from which are nontaxable under the provisions of this article; provided,
however, in the case of securities dealers, interest payments or accruals on loans,
the proceeds of which are used to purchase tax-exempt securities, shall be deductible
if income from otherwise tax-free securities is reported as income.  Investment
interest expense shall be limited to investment income.  Interest expense incurred
for the purchase of treasury stock, to pay dividends, or incurred as a result of
an undercapitalized affiliated corporation may not be deducted unless an ordinary
and necessary business purpose can be established to the satisfaction of the commissioner. 
For the purposes of this paragraph, the phrase "interest upon the indebtedness
for the purchase of tax-free bonds" applies only to the indebtedness incurred
for the purpose of directly purchasing tax-free bonds and does not apply to any
other indebtedness incurred in the regular course of the taxpayer's business.  Any
corporation, association, organization or other entity taxable under Section 27-7-23(c)
shall allocate interest expense as provided in Section 27-7-23(c)(3)(I).
          (c)  Taxes.  Taxes
paid or accrued within the taxable year, except state and federal income taxes,
excise taxes based on or measured by net income, estate and inheritance taxes, gift
taxes, cigar and cigarette taxes, gasoline taxes, and sales and use taxes unless
incurred as an item of expense in a trade or business or in the production of taxable
income.  In the case of an individual, taxes permitted as an itemized deduction
under the provisions of subsection (3)(a)
of this section are to be claimed thereunder.
          (d)  Business losses.
              (i)  Losses sustained
during the taxable year not compensated for by insurance or otherwise, if incurred
in trade or business, or nonbusiness transactions entered into for profit.
              (ii)  Limitations on
losses from passive activities and rental real estate shall conform to the provisions
of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
          (e)  Bad debts. 
Losses from debts ascertained to be worthless and charged off during the taxable
year, if sustained in the conduct of the regular trade or business of the taxpayer;
provided, that such losses shall be allowed only when the taxpayer has reported
as income, on the accrual basis, the amount of such debt or account.
          (f)  Depreciation. 
A reasonable allowance for exhaustion, wear and tear of property used in the trade
or business, or rental property, and depreciation upon buildings based upon their
reasonable value as of March 16, 1912, if acquired prior thereto, and upon cost
if acquired subsequent to that date.  In the case of new or used aircraft, equipment,
engines, or other parts and tools used for aviation, allowance for bonus depreciation
conforms with the federal bonus depreciation rates and reasonable allowance for
depreciation under this section is no less than one hundred percent (100%). 
          (g)  Depletion. 
In the case of mines, oil and gas wells, other natural deposits and timber, a reasonable
allowance for depletion and for depreciation of improvements, based upon cost, including
cost of development, not otherwise deducted, or fair market value as of March 16,
1912, if acquired prior to that date, such allowance to be made upon regulations
prescribed by the commissioner, with the approval of the Governor.
          (h)  Contributions or
gifts.  Except as otherwise provided in paragraph (p) of this subsection or
subsection (3)(a) of this section for individuals,
contributions or gifts made by corporations within the taxable year to corporations,
organizations, associations or institutions, including Community Chest funds, foundations
and trusts created solely and exclusively for religious, charitable, scientific
or educational purposes, or for the prevention of cruelty to children or animals,
no part of the net earnings of which inure to the benefit of any private stockholder
or individual.  This deduction shall be allowed in an amount not to exceed twenty
percent (20%) of the net income.  Such contributions or gifts shall be allowable
as deductions only if verified under rules and regulations prescribed by the commissioner,
with the approval of the Governor.  Contributions made in any form other than cash
shall be allowed as a deduction, subject to the limitations herein provided, in
an amount equal to the actual market value of the contributions at the time the
contribution is actually made and consummated.
          (i)  Reserve funds -
insurance companies.  In the case of insurance companies the net additions required
by law to be made within the taxable year to reserve funds when such reserve funds
are maintained for the purpose of liquidating policies at maturity.
          (j)  Annuity income. 
The sums, other than dividends, paid within the taxpayer year on policy or annuity
contracts when such income has been included in gross income.
          (k)  Contributions to
employee pension plans.  Contributions made by an employer to a plan or a trust
forming part of a pension plan, stock bonus plan, disability or death-benefit plan,
or profit-sharing plan of such employer for the exclusive benefit of some or all
of his, their, or its employees, or their beneficiaries, shall be deductible from
his, their, or its income only to the extent that, and for the taxable year in which,
the contribution is deductible for federal income tax purposes under the Internal
Revenue Code of 1986 and any other provisions of similar purport in the Internal
Revenue Laws of the United States, and the rules, regulations, rulings and determinations
promulgated thereunder, provided that:
              (i)  The plan or trust
be irrevocable.
               (ii)  The plan or trust
constitute a part of a pension plan, stock bonus plan, disability or death-benefit
plan, or profit-sharing plan for the exclusive benefit of some or all of the employer's
employees and/or officers, or their beneficiaries, for the purpose of distributing
the corpus and income of the plan or trust to such employees and/or officers, or
their beneficiaries.
              (iii)  No part of the
corpus or income of the plan or trust can be used for purposes other than for the
exclusive benefit of employees and/or officers, or their beneficiaries.
     Contributions to all plans or
to all trusts of real or personal property (or real and personal property combined)
or to insured plans created under a retirement plan for which provision has been
made under the laws of the United States of America, making such contributions deductible
from income for federal income tax purposes, shall be deductible only to the same
extent under the Income Tax Laws of the State of Mississippi.
          (l)  Net operating loss
carrybacks and carryovers.  A net operating loss for any taxable year ending
after December 31, 1993, and taxable years thereafter, shall be a net operating
loss carryback to each of the three (3) taxable years preceding the taxable year
of the loss.  If the net operating loss for any taxable year is not exhausted by
carrybacks to the three (3) taxable years preceding the taxable year of the loss,
then there shall be a net operating loss carryover to each of the fifteen (15) taxable
years following the taxable year of the loss beginning with any taxable year after
December 31, 1991.
     For any taxable year ending after
December 31, 1997, the period for net operating loss carrybacks and net operating
loss carryovers shall be the same as those established by the Internal Revenue Code
and the rules, regulations, rulings and determinations promulgated thereunder as
in effect at the taxable year end or on December 31, 2000, whichever is earlier.
     A net operating loss for any
taxable year ending after December 31, 2001, and taxable years thereafter, shall
be a net operating loss carryback to each of the two (2) taxable years preceding
the taxable year of the loss.  If the net operating loss for any taxable year is
not exhausted by carrybacks to the two (2) taxable years preceding the taxable year
of the loss, then there shall be a net operating loss carryover to each of the twenty
(20) taxable years following the taxable year of the loss beginning with any taxable
year after the taxable year of the loss.
     The term "net operating
loss," for the purposes of this paragraph, shall be the excess of the deductions
allowed over the gross income; provided, however, the following deductions shall
not be allowed in computing same:
               (i)  No net operating
loss deduction shall be allowed.
              (ii)  No personal exemption
deduction shall be allowed.
              (iii)  Allowable deductions
which are not attributable to taxpayer's trade or business shall be allowed only
to the extent of the amount of gross income not derived from such trade or business.
     Any taxpayer entitled to a carryback
period as provided by this paragraph may elect to relinquish the entire carryback
period with respect to a net operating loss for any taxable year ending after December
31, 1991.  The election shall be made in the manner prescribed by the Department
of Revenue and shall be made by the due date, including extensions of time, for
filing the taxpayer's return for the taxable year of the net operating loss for
which the election is to be in effect.  The election, once made for any taxable
year, shall be irrevocable for that taxable year.
          (m)  Amortization of
pollution or environmental control facilities.  Allowance of deduction.  Every
taxpayer, at his election, shall be entitled to a deduction for pollution or environmental
control facilities to the same extent as that allowed under the Internal Revenue
Code and the rules, regulations, rulings and determinations promulgated thereunder.
          (n)  Dividend distributions
- real estate investment trusts.  "Real estate investment trust" (hereinafter
referred to as REIT) shall have the meaning ascribed to such term in Section 856
of the federal Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended.  A REIT is allowed a dividend
distributed deduction if the dividend distributions meet the requirements of Section
857 or are otherwise deductible under Section 858 or 860, federal Internal Revenue
Code of 1986, as amended.  In addition:
              (i)  A dividend distributed
deduction shall only be allowed for dividends paid by a publicly traded REIT.  A
qualified REIT subsidiary shall be allowed a dividend distributed deduction if its
owner is a publicly traded REIT.
              (ii)  Income generated
from real estate contributed or sold to a REIT by a shareholder or related party
shall not give rise to a dividend distributed deduction, unless the shareholder
or related party would have received the dividend distributed deduction under this
chapter.
              (iii)  A holding corporation
receiving a dividend from a REIT shall not be allowed the deduction in Section 27-7-15(4)(t).
              (iv)  Any REIT not allowed
the dividend distributed deduction in the federal Internal Revenue Code of 1986,
as amended, shall not be allowed a dividend distributed deduction under this chapter.
     The commissioner is authorized
to promulgate rules and regulations consistent with the provisions in Section 269
of the federal Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, so as to prevent the evasion
or avoidance of state income tax.
          (o)  Contributions to
college savings trust fund accounts.  Contributions or payments to a Mississippi
Affordable College Savings Program account are deductible as provided under Section
37-155-113.  Payments made under a prepaid tuition contract entered into under the
Mississippi Prepaid Affordable College Tuition Program are deductible as provided
under Section 37-155-17.
          (p)  Contributions of
human pharmaceutical products.  To the extent that a "major supplier"
as defined in Section 27-13-13(2)(d) contributes human pharmaceutical products in
excess of Two Hundred Fifty Million Dollars ($250,000,000.00) as determined under
Section 170 of the Internal Revenue Code, the charitable contribution limitation
associated with those donations shall follow the federal limitation but cannot result
in the Mississippi net income being reduced below zero.
          (q)  Contributions to
ABLE trust fund accounts.  Contributions or payments to a Mississippi Achieving
a Better Life Experience (ABLE) Program account are deductible as provided under
Section 43-28-13.
     (2)  Restrictions on the deductibility of certain intangible
expenses and interest expenses with a related member.
          (a)  As used in this subsection (2):
              (i)  "Intangible expenses and costs" include:
                   1.  Expenses, losses
and costs for, related to, or in connection directly or indirectly with the direct
or indirect acquisition, use, maintenance or management, ownership, sale, exchange
or any other disposition of intangible property to the extent such amounts are allowed
as deductions or costs in determining taxable income under this chapter;
                   2.  Expenses or
losses related to or incurred in connection directly or indirectly with factoring
transactions or discounting transactions;
                    3.  Royalty, patent,
technical and copyright fees;
                   4.  Licensing fees;
and 
                   5.  Other similar
expenses and costs.
               (ii)  "Intangible
property" means patents, patent applications, trade names, trademarks, service
marks, copyrights and similar types of intangible assets.
              (iii)  "Interest
expenses and cost" means amounts directly or indirectly allowed as deductions
for purposes of determining taxable income under this chapter to the extent such
interest expenses and costs are directly or indirectly for, related to, or in connection
with the direct or indirect acquisition, maintenance, management, ownership, sale,
exchange or disposition of intangible property.
              (iv)  "Related
member" means an entity or person that, with respect to the taxpayer during
all or any portion of the taxable year, is a related entity, a component member
as defined in the Internal Revenue Code, or is an entity or a person to or from
whom there is attribution of stock ownership in accordance with Section 1563(e)
of the Internal Revenue Code.
               (v)  "Related
entity" means:
                   1.  A stockholder
who is an individual or a member of the stockholder's family, as defined in regulations
prescribed by the commissioner, if the stockholder and the members of the stockholder's
family own, directly, indirectly, beneficially or constructively, in the aggregate,
at least fifty percent (50%) of the value of the taxpayer's outstanding stock;
                   2.  A stockholder,
or a stockholder's partnership, limited liability company, estate, trust or corporation,
if the stockholder and the stockholder's partnerships, limited liability companies,
estates, trusts and corporations own, directly, indirectly, beneficially or constructively,
in the aggregate, at least fifty percent (50%) of the value of the taxpayer's outstanding
stock;
                   3.  A corporation,
or a party related to the corporation in a manner that would require an attribution
of stock from the corporation to the party or from the party to the corporation,
if the taxpayer owns, directly, indirectly, beneficially or constructively, at least
fifty percent (50%) of the value of the corporation's outstanding stock under regulation
prescribed by the commissioner;
                   4.  Any entity
or person which would be a related member under this section if the taxpayer were
considered a corporation for purposes of this section.
          (b)  In computing net income, a taxpayer
shall add back otherwise deductible interest expenses and costs and intangible expenses
and costs directly or indirectly paid, accrued to or incurred, in connection directly
or indirectly with one or more direct or indirect transactions with one or more
related members.
          (c)  The
adjustments required by this subsection shall not apply to such portion of interest
expenses and costs and intangible expenses and costs that the taxpayer can establish
meets one (1) of the following:
              (i)  The related member
directly or indirectly paid, accrued or incurred such portion to a person during
the same income year who is not a related member; or
              (ii)  The transaction
giving rise to the interest expenses and costs or intangible expenses and costs
between the taxpayer and related member was done primarily for a valid business
purpose other than the avoidance of taxes, and the related member is not primarily
engaged in the acquisition, use, maintenance or management, ownership, sale, exchange
or any other disposition of intangible property.
          (d)  Nothing in this subsection
shall require a taxpayer to add to its net income more than once any amount of interest
expenses and costs or intangible expenses and costs that the taxpayer pays, accrues
or incurs to a related member.
          (e)  The commissioner may
prescribe such regulations as necessary or appropriate to carry out the purposes
of this subsection, including, but not limited to, clarifying definitions of terms,
rules of stock attribution, factoring and discount transactions.
     (3)  Individual nonbusiness
deductions.
          (a)  The amount allowable
for individual nonbusiness itemized deductions for federal income tax purposes where
the individual is eligible to elect, for the taxable year, to itemize deductions
on his federal return except the following:
              (i)  The deduction for
state income taxes paid or other taxes allowed for federal purposes in lieu of state
income taxes paid;
              (ii)  The deduction
for gaming losses from gaming establishments;
              (iii)  The deduction
for taxes collected by licensed gaming establishments pursuant to Section
27-7-901;
              (iv)  The deduction
for taxes collected by gaming establishments pursuant to Section 27-7-903 * * *.;
               (v)  The deduction
for medical expenses for the provision of gender transition procedures as defined
in Section 3 of this act.
          (b)  In lieu of the individual
nonbusiness itemized deductions authorized in paragraph (a), for all purposes other
than ordinary and necessary expenses paid or incurred during the taxable year in
carrying on any trade or business, an optional standard deduction of:
              (i)  Three Thousand
Four Hundred Dollars ($3,400.00) through calendar year 1997, Four Thousand Two Hundred
Dollars ($4,200.00) for the calendar year 1998 and Four Thousand Six Hundred Dollars
($4,600.00) for each calendar year thereafter in the case of married individuals
filing a joint or combined return;
              (ii)  One Thousand Seven
Hundred Dollars ($1,700.00) through calendar year 1997, Two Thousand One Hundred
Dollars ($2,100.00) for the calendar year 1998 and Two Thousand Three Hundred Dollars
($2,300.00) for each calendar year thereafter in the case of married individuals
filing separate returns;
              (iii)  Three Thousand
Four Hundred Dollars ($3,400.00) in the case of a head of family; or
               (iv)  Two Thousand
Three Hundred Dollars ($2,300.00) in the case of an individual who is not married.
     In the case of a husband and
wife living together, having separate incomes, and filing combined returns, the
standard deduction authorized may be divided in any manner they choose.  In the
case of separate returns by a husband and wife, the standard deduction shall not
be allowed to either if the taxable income of one of the spouses is determined without
regard to the standard deduction.
          (c)  A nonresident individual
shall be allowed the same individual nonbusiness deductions as are authorized for
resident individuals in paragraph (a) or (b) of this subsection; however, the nonresident
individual is entitled only to that proportion of the individual nonbusiness deductions
as his net income from sources within the State of Mississippi bears to his total
or entire net income from all sources.
     (4)  Nothing in this section
shall permit the same item to be deducted more than once, either in fact or in effect.
     (5)  Notwithstanding
any other provision in Title 27, Mississippi Code of 1972, there shall be allowed
an income tax deduction for otherwise deductible expenses if:
          (a)  The payment(s) for
such deductible expenses are made with the grant or loan program of the Paycheck
Protection Program as authorized under (i) the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic
Security (CARES) Act and the Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2021, (ii) the COVID-19
Economic Injury Disaster Loan Program, (iii) the 2020 COVID-19 Mississippi Business
Assistance Act, (iv) the Rental Assistance Grant Program, (v) the Shuttered Venue
Operators Grant Program and Restaurant Revitalization Fund authorized by the Economic
Aid to Hard-Hit Small Businesses, Nonprofits, and Venues Act, and amended by the
federal American Rescue Plan Act, and/or (vi) the Mississippi Agriculture Stabilization
Act; and
          (b)  Such deductible expenses
shall be allowed as deductions for federal income tax purposes.
     SECTION 8.  The
following shall be codified as Section 43-13-117.7, Mississippi Code of 1972:
     43-13-117.7.  Notwithstanding
any other provisions of Section 43-13-117, the division
shall not reimburse or provide coverage for gender transition procedures for a person
under eighteen (18) years of age.  As used in this section, the term "gender
transition procedures" means the same as defined in Section 3 of this act.
     SECTION 9.  Section
73-15-29, Mississippi Code of 1972, is amended as follows:
     73-15-29.  (1)  The board shall
have power to revoke, suspend or refuse to renew any license issued by the board,
or to revoke or suspend any privilege to practice, or to deny an application for
a license, or to fine, place on probation and/or discipline a licensee, in any manner
specified in this article, upon proof that such person:
          (a)  Has committed fraud
or deceit in securing or attempting to secure such license;
          (b)  Has been convicted
of a felony, or a crime involving moral turpitude or has had accepted by a court
a plea of nolo contendere to a felony or a crime involving moral turpitude (a certified
copy of the judgment of the court of competent jurisdiction of such conviction or
pleas shall be prima facie evidence of such conviction);
          (c)  Has negligently or
willfully acted in a manner inconsistent with the health or safety of the persons
under the licensee's care;
          (d)  Has had a license or
privilege to practice as a registered nurse or a licensed practical nurse suspended
or revoked in any jurisdiction, has voluntarily surrendered such license or privilege
to practice in any jurisdiction, has been placed on probation as a registered nurse
or licensed practical nurse in any jurisdiction or has been placed under a disciplinary
order(s) in any manner as a registered nurse or licensed practical nurse in any
jurisdiction, (a certified copy of the order of suspension, revocation, probation
or disciplinary action shall be prima facie evidence of such action);
          (e)  Has negligently or
willfully practiced nursing in a manner that fails to meet generally accepted standards
of such nursing practice;
          (f)  Has negligently or
willfully violated any order, rule or regulation of the board pertaining to nursing
practice or licensure;
          (g)  Has falsified or in
a repeatedly negligent manner made incorrect entries or failed to make essential
entries on records;
          (h)  Is addicted to or dependent
on alcohol or other habit-forming drugs or is a habitual user of narcotics, barbiturates,
amphetamines, hallucinogens, or other drugs having similar effect, or has misappropriated
any medication;
          (i)  Has a physical, mental
or emotional condition that renders the licensee unable to perform nursing services
or duties with reasonable skill and safety;
          (j)  Has engaged in any
other conduct, whether of the same or of a different character from that specified
in this article, that would constitute a crime as defined in Title 97 of the Mississippi
Code of 1972, as now or hereafter amended, and that relates to such person's employment
as a registered nurse or licensed practical nurse;
          (k)  Engages in conduct
likely to deceive, defraud or harm the public;
          (l)  Engages in any unprofessional
conduct as identified by the board in its rules;
          (m)  Has violated any provision
of this article;  * * *or
          (n)  Violation(s) of the
provisions of Sections 41-121-1 through 41-121-9 relating to deceptive advertisement
by health care practitioners.  This paragraph shall stand repealed on July 1, 2025 * * *.; or
          (o)  Violation(s) of
any provision of Sections 1 through 6 of this act.
     (2)  When the board finds any
person unqualified because of any of the grounds set forth in subsection (1) of
this section, it may enter an order imposing one or more of the following penalties:
          (a)  Denying application
for a license or other authorization to practice nursing or practical nursing;
          (b)  Administering a reprimand;
          (c)  Suspending or restricting
the license or other authorization to practice as a registered nurse or licensed
practical nurse for up to two (2) years without review;
          (d)  Revoking the license
or other authorization to practice nursing or practical nursing;
          (e)  Requiring the disciplinee
to submit to care, counseling or treatment by persons and/or agencies approved or
designated by the board as a condition for initial, continued or renewed licensure
or other authorization to practice nursing or practical nursing;
          (f)  Requiring the disciplinee
to participate in a program of education prescribed by the board as a condition
for initial, continued or renewed licensure or other authorization to practice;
          (g)  Requiring the disciplinee
to practice under the supervision of a registered nurse for a specified period of
time; or
          (h)  Imposing a fine not
to exceed Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00).
     (3)  In addition to the grounds
specified in subsection (1) of this section, the board shall be authorized to suspend
the license or privilege to practice of any licensee for being out of compliance
with an order for support, as defined in Section 93-11-153.  The procedure for suspension
of a license or privilege to practice for being out of compliance with an order
for support, and the procedure for the reissuance or reinstatement of a license
or privilege to practice suspended for that purpose, and the payment of any fees
for the reissuance or reinstatement of a license or privilege to practice suspended
for that purpose, shall be governed by Section 93-11-157 or 93-11-163, as the case
may be.  If there is any conflict between any provision of Section 93-11-157 or
93-11-163 and any provision of this article, the provisions of Section 93-11-157
or 93-11-163, as the case may be, shall control.
     (4)  If the public health, safety
or welfare imperatively requires emergency action and the board incorporates a finding
to that effect in an order, the board may order summary suspension of a license
pending proceedings for revocation or other action.  These proceedings shall be
promptly instituted and determined by the board.
     (5)  The board may establish
by rule an alternative to discipline program for licensees who have an impairment
as a result of substance abuse or a mental health condition, which program shall
include at least the following components:
          (a)  Participation in the
program is voluntary with the licensee, and the licensee must enter the program
before the board holds a disciplinary action hearing regarding the licensee;
          (b)  The full cost of participation
in the program, including the cost of any care, counseling, treatment and/or education
received by the licensee, shall be borne by the licensee;
          (c)  All of the procedures
and records regarding the licensee's participation in the program shall be confidential,
shall not be disclosed and shall be exempt from the provisions of the Mississippi
Public Records Act of 1983; and
          (d)  A licensee may not
participate in the program more often than one (1) time during any period of five
(5) years or such longer period as set by the board.
     (6)  A nurse practitioner who
provides a written certification as authorized under the Mississippi Medical Cannabis
Act and in compliance with rules and regulations adopted thereunder shall not be
subject to any disciplinary action under this section solely due to providing the
written certification.
     SECTION 10.  Section
73-25-29, Mississippi Code of 1972, is amended as follows:
     73-25-29.  The grounds for the
nonissuance, suspension, revocation or restriction of a license or the denial of
reinstatement or renewal of a license are:
          (1)  Habitual personal use
of narcotic drugs, or any other drug having addiction-forming or addiction-sustaining
liability.
          (2)  Habitual use of intoxicating
liquors, or any beverage, to an extent which affects professional competency.
          (3)  Administering, dispensing
or prescribing any narcotic drug, or any other drug having addiction-forming or
addiction-sustaining liability otherwise than in the course of legitimate professional
practice.
          (4)  Conviction of violation
of any federal or state law regulating the possession, distribution or use of any
narcotic drug or any drug considered a controlled substance under state or federal
law, a certified copy of the conviction order or judgment rendered by the trial
court being prima facie evidence thereof, notwithstanding the pendency of any appeal.
          (5)  Procuring, or attempting
to procure, or aiding in, an abortion that is not medically indicated.
          (6)  Conviction of a felony
or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, a certified copy of the conviction order
or judgment rendered by the trial court being prima facie evidence thereof, notwithstanding
the pendency of any appeal.
          (7)  Obtaining or attempting
to obtain a license by fraud or deception.
          (8)  Unprofessional conduct,
which includes, but is not limited to:
              (a)  Practicing medicine
under a false or assumed name or impersonating another practitioner, living or dead.
              (b)  Knowingly performing
any act which in any way assists an unlicensed person to practice medicine.
               (c)  Making or willfully
causing to be made any flamboyant claims concerning the licensee's professional
excellence.
              (d)  Being guilty of
any dishonorable or unethical conduct likely to deceive, defraud or harm the public.
              (e)  Obtaining a fee
as personal compensation or gain from a person on fraudulent representation of a
disease or injury condition generally considered incurable by competent medical
authority in the light of current scientific knowledge and practice can be cured
or offering, undertaking, attempting or agreeing to cure or treat the same by a
secret method, which he refuses to divulge to the board upon request.
              (f)  Use of any false,
fraudulent or forged statement or document, or the use of any fraudulent, deceitful,
dishonest or immoral practice in connection with any of the licensing requirements,
including the signing in his professional capacity any certificate that is known
to be false at the time he makes or signs such certificate.
              (g)  Failing to identify
a physician's school of practice in all professional uses of his name by use of
his earned degree or a description of his school of practice.
          (9)  The refusal of a licensing
authority of another state or jurisdiction to issue or renew a license, permit or
certificate to practice medicine in that jurisdiction or the revocation, suspension
or other restriction imposed on a license, permit or certificate issued by such
licensing authority which prevents or restricts practice in that jurisdiction, a
certified copy of the disciplinary order or action taken by the other state or jurisdiction
being prima facie evidence thereof, notwithstanding the pendency of any appeal.
          (10)  Surrender of a license
or authorization to practice medicine in another state or jurisdiction or surrender
of membership on any medical staff or in any medical or professional association
or society while under disciplinary investigation by any of those authorities or
bodies for acts or conduct similar to acts or conduct which would constitute grounds
for action as defined in this section.
          (11)  Final sanctions imposed
by the United States Department of Health and Human Services, Office of Inspector
General or any successor federal agency or office, based upon a finding of incompetency,
gross misconduct or failure to meet professionally recognized standards of health
care; a certified copy of the notice of final sanction being prima facie evidence
thereof.  As used in this paragraph, the term "final sanction" means the
written notice to a physician from the United States Department of Health and Human
Services, Officer of Inspector General or any successor federal agency or office,
which implements the exclusion.
          (12)  Failure to furnish
the board, its investigators or representatives information legally requested by
the board.
          (13)  Violation of any provision(s)
of the Medical Practice Act or the rules and regulations of the board or of any
order, stipulation or agreement with the board.
          (14)  Violation(s) of the
provisions of Sections 41-121-1 through 41-121-9 relating to deceptive advertisement
by health care practitioners.
          (15)  Performing or inducing
an abortion on a woman in violation of any provision of Sections 41-41-131 through
41-41-145.
          (16)  Performing an abortion
on a pregnant woman after determining that the unborn human individual that the
pregnant woman is carrying has a detectable fetal heartbeat as provided in Section
41-41-34.1.
          (17)  Violation(s) of
any provision of Sections 1 through 6 of this act.
     In addition to the grounds specified
above, the board shall be authorized to suspend the license of any licensee for
being out of compliance with an order for support, as defined in Section 93-11-153. 
The procedure for suspension of a license for being out of compliance with an order
for support, and the procedure for the reissuance or reinstatement of a license
suspended for that purpose, and the payment of any fees for the reissuance or reinstatement
of a license suspended for that purpose, shall be governed by Section 93-11-157
or 93-11-163, as the case may be.  If there is any conflict between any provision
of Section 93-11-157 or 93-11-163 and any provision of this chapter, the provisions
of Section 93-11-157 or 93-11-163, as the case may be, shall control. 
     A physician who provides a written
certification as authorized under the Mississippi Medical Cannabis Act and in compliance
with rules and regulations adopted thereunder shall not be subject to any disciplinary
action under this section solely due to providing the written certification.
     SECTION 11.  Section
83-9-22, Mississippi Code of 1972, is amended as follows:
     83-9-22.  (1)  (a)  Notwithstanding
any other provision of the law to the contrary, except as otherwise provided in
subsections (3) and (4) of this section, no health coverage plan shall
restrict coverage for medically appropriate treatment prescribed by a physician
and agreed to by a fully informed insured, or if the insured lacks legal capacity
to consent by a person who has legal authority to consent on his or her behalf,
based on an insured's diagnosis with a terminal condition.  Refusing to pay for
treatment rendered to an insured near the end of life that is consistent with best
practices for treatment of a disease or condition, approved uses of a drug or device,
or uses supported by peer reviewed medical literature, is a per se violation of
this section.
          (b)  Violations of this
section shall constitute an unfair trade practice and subject the violator to the
penalties provided by law.
          (c)  As used in this section
"terminal condition" means any aggressive malignancy, chronic end-stage
cardiovascular or cerebral vascular disease, or any other disease, illness or condition
which a physician diagnoses as terminal.
          (d)  As used in this section,
a "health coverage plan" shall mean any hospital, health or medical expense
insurance policy, hospital or medical service contract, employee welfare benefit
plan, contract or agreement with a health maintenance organization or a preferred
provider organization, health and accident insurance policy, or any other insurance
contract of this type, including a group insurance plan and the State Health and
Life Insurance Plan.
     (2)  (a)  Notwithstanding any
other provision of the law to the contrary, no health benefit paid directly or indirectly
with state funds, specifically Medicaid, shall restrict coverage for medically appropriate
treatment prescribed by a physician and agreed to by a fully informed individual,
or if the individual lacks legal capacity to consent by a person who has legal authority
to consent on his or her behalf, based on an individual's diagnosis with a terminal
condition.
          (b)  Refusing to pay for
treatment rendered to an individual near the end of life that is consistent with
best practices for treatment of a disease or condition, approved uses of a drug
or device, or uses supported by peer reviewed medical literature, is a per se violation
of this section.
          (c)  As used in this section
"terminal condition" means any aggressive malignancy, chronic end-stage
cardiovascular or cerebral vascular disease, or any other disease, illness or condition
which a physician diagnoses as terminal. 
     (3)  This section does not require
a health coverage plan to cover and pay for the treatment of a person who is a cardholder
and registered qualifying patient with medical cannabis that is lawful under the
Mississippi Medical Cannabis Act and in compliance with rules and regulations adopted
thereunder.
     (4)  This section does not
require a health coverage plan to provide coverage for gender transition
procedures for a person under eighteen (18) years of age.  As used in this
section, the term "gender transition procedures" means the same as
defined in Section 3 of this act.
     SECTION 12.  The
following shall be codified as Section 83-9-37, Mississippi Code of 1972:
     83-9-37.  (1)  As used in this section, the term "gender transition
procedures" means the same as defined in Section 3 of this act.
     (2)  A
health benefit plan under an insurance policy or other plan providing health care
coverage in this state shall not include reimbursement for gender transition procedures
for a person under eighteen (18) years of age.
     (3)  A health benefit plan
under an insurance policy or other plan providing health care coverage in this
state is not required to provide coverage for gender transition procedures for
a person under eighteen (18) years of age.
     SECTION 13.  This act
shall take effect and be in force from and after July 1, 2023.







 
88R11351 EAS-D


 


 

		By: Hall
S.B. No. 1082




 


 



 		
			

A BILL TO BE ENTITLED




 
			

AN ACT




 
			
relating to the definition and use of the terms "male" and "female" 



 
			
for purposes of certain government documents.



 
			
       BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF TEXAS:



 
			
       SECTION 1.  FINDINGS.  The legislature finds that:



 
			
             (1)  males and females possess unique immutable 



 
			
biological differences that manifest prior to birth and increase as 



 
			
individuals age and experience puberty;



 
			
             (2)  biological differences between the sexes mean that 



 
			
only females are able to get pregnant, give birth, and breastfeed 



 
			
children;



 
			
             (3)  biological differences between the sexes mean that 



 
			
males are, on average, bigger, stronger, and faster than females;



 
			
             (4)  biological differences between the sexes leave 



 
			
females more physically vulnerable than males to specific forms of 



 
			
violence, including sexual violence;



 
			
             (5)  females have historically suffered discrimination 



 
			
in education, athletics, and employment;



 
			
             (6)  biological differences between the sexes are 



 
			
enduring and may, in some circumstances, warrant the creation of 



 
			
separate social, educational, athletic, or other spaces in order to 



 
			
ensure individuals' safety and allow members of each sex to succeed 



 
			
and thrive;



 
			
             (7)  inconsistencies in court rulings and policy 



 
			
initiatives with regard to the definitions of "sex," "male," 



 
			
"female," "man," and "woman" have led to endangerment of single-sex 



 
			
spaces and resources, necessitating clarification of certain 



 
			
terms; and



 
			
             (8)  an individual's sex is defined as the individual's 



 
			
biological sex at birth, either male or female.



 
			
       SECTION 2.  Chapter 2051, Government Code, is amended by 



 
			
adding Subchapter G to read as follows:



 
			
SUBCHAPTER G.  DEFINITIONS OF MALE AND FEMALE FOR CERTAIN 



 
			
GOVERNMENT DOCUMENTS, PUBLICATIONS, AND NOTICES



 
			
       Sec. 2051.251.  DEFINITIONS.  In this subchapter:



 
			
             (1)  "Female" means an individual whose biological 



 
			
reproductive system is developed to produce ova.



 
			
             (2)  "Governmental entity" has the meaning assigned by 



 
			
Section 2051.041.



 
			
             (3)  "Male" means an individual whose biological 



 
			
reproductive system is developed to fertilize the ova of a female.



 
			
       Sec. 2051.252.  DEFINITIONS OF MALE AND FEMALE FOR CERTAIN 



 
			
GOVERNMENT DOCUMENTS, PUBLICATIONS, AND NOTICES.  A document, 



 
			
policy, survey, questionnaire, report, publication, notice, or 



 
			
other written or electronic material produced by a governmental 



 
			
entity or official may only reference two sexes, male and female, 



 
			
when requesting or providing information regarding a person's sex.



 
			
       SECTION 3.  This Act takes effect September 1, 2023.




MISSISSIPPI LEGISLATURE
2023 Regular Session
To: Judiciary, Division A
By: Senator(s) Hill, Branning
Senate Bill 2773
AN ACT TO ENACT THE DEFENSE OF TITLE IX ACT; TO PROVIDE INTERPRETATION
AND CLARIFICATION OF CERTAIN TERMS RELATING TO TITLE IX OF THE FEDERAL CODE; TO
STATE LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS AND INTENT; TO CLARIFY TERMS FOR THE PURPOSES OF STATE
LAW; TO PROVIDE THAT POLICIES AND LAWS THAT DISTINGUISH BETWEEN THE SEXES ARE
SUBJECT TO INTERMEDIATE CONSTITUTIONAL SCRUTINY; AND FOR RELATED PURPOSES.
     BE IT ENACTED BY THE
LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF MISSISSIPPI:
     SECTION 1.  (1)
 This section shall be known and may be cited as "The Defense of Title IX Act."
     (2)  The Legislature finds and
declares that:
          (a)  Males and females
possess unique and immutable biological differences that manifest prior to
birth and increase with age and puberty.
          (b)  Biological
differences between the sexes mean that only females can get pregnant, give
birth and breastfeed children.
          (c)  Biological
differences between the sexes mean that males are, on average, larger in size
and possess greater body strength than females.
          (d)  Whereas biological
differences between the sexes can expose females to greater harm than males
from specific forms of violence, including sexual violence.
          (e)  Females have historically
suffered from discrimination in education, athletics and employment.
          (f)  Females have achieved
inspirational and significant accomplishments in education, athletics and
employment.
          (g)  Biological differences
between the sexes are enduring and may, in some circumstances, warrant the creation
of separate social, educational, athletic or other spaces in order to ensure safety
and/or to allow members of each sex to succeed and thrive.
          (h)  When it comes to sex:
               (i)  "Equal"
does not mean "same" or "identical"; and
               (ii)  Separate is not
inherently unequal.
          (i)  Recent misguided
court rulings and policy initiatives relating to the definition of "sex"
have led to the endangerment of single-sex spaces and resources dedicated to
women, thereby necessitating clarification of certain terms.
     (3)  Therefore, it is the intent
of the Legislature that:
          (a)  For purposes of
state/federal law, a person's "sex" is defined as his or her
biological sex (either male or female) at birth.
          (b)  For purposes of
state/federal law, a 'female' is an individual whose biological reproductive
system is developed to produce ova; a 'male' is an individual whose biological
reproductive system is developed to fertilize the ova of a female.
          (c)  For purposes of
state/federal law, 'woman' and 'girl' refer to human females, and the terms 'man'
and 'boy' refer to human males.
          (d)  For purposes of
state/federal law, the word 'mother' is defined as a parent of the female sex
and 'father' is defined as a parent of the male sex.
          (e)  When it comes to
sex, 'equal' does not mean 'same' or 'identical'.
          (f)  When it comes to
sex, separate is not inherently unequal.
          (g)  There are
legitimate reasons to distinguish between the sexes with respect to athletics,
prisons or other detention facilities, domestic violence shelters, rape crisis
centers, locker rooms, restrooms, and other areas where biology, safety, and/or
privacy are implicated.
          (h)  Policies and laws
that distinguish between the sexes are subject to intermediate constitutional
scrutiny, which forbids unfair discrimination against similarly-situated males and
females but allows the law to distinguish between the sexes where such
distinctions are substantially related to important governmental objectives.
          (i)  Any public school
or school district and any federal/state/local agency, department, or office
that collects vital statistics for the purpose of complying with anti-discrimination
laws or for the purpose of gathering accurate public health, crime, economic or
other data shall identify each individual who is part of the collected data set
as either male or female at birth.
     SECTION 2.  This act
shall take effect and be in force from and after July 1, 2023.




Senate
File
159
-
Introduced


SENATE
FILE
159


BY
SALMON


A
BILL
FOR


An
Act
relating
to
education,
including
modifying
the
1


responsibilities
of
the
state
board
of
education
and
2


school
districts,
prohibiting
instruction
related
to
3


gender
identity
or
sexual
orientation
in
school
districts
4


and
charter
schools
in
kindergarten
through
grade
eight,
5


modifying
provisions
associated
with
the
human
growth
and
6


development
instruction
and
health
screenings
provided
in
7


school
districts,
charter
schools,
and
innovation
zone
8


schools,
and
providing
civil
penalties.
9


BE
IT
ENACTED
BY
THE
GENERAL
ASSEMBLY
OF
THE
STATE
OF
IOWA:
10


TLSB
1141XS
(7)
90


jda/jh




S.F.
159


Section
1.
Section
256.7,
Code
2023,
is
amended
by
adding
1


the
following
new
subsection:
2


NEW
SUBSECTION


.
35.
Adopt
rules
establishing
standards
for
3


training
programs
related
to
student
support
services
that
are
4


provided
by
school
districts
to
school
district
employees
or
5


contractors.
6


Sec.
2.
Section
256.11,
subsections
2,
3,
and
4,
Code
2023,
7


are
amended
to
read
as
follows:
8


2.
The
kindergarten
program
shall
include
experiences
9


designed
to
develop
healthy
emotional
and
social
habits
and
10


growth
in
the
language
arts
and
communication
skills,
as
well
11


as
a
capacity
for
the
completion
of
individual
tasks,
and
12


protect
and
increase
physical
well-being
with
attention
given
13


to
experiences
relating
to
the
development
of
life
skills
and
,


14


subject
to
section
279.78,
age-appropriate
and
research-based
15


human
growth
and
development.
A
kindergarten
teacher
shall
be
16


licensed
to
teach
in
kindergarten.
An
accredited
nonpublic
17


school
must
meet
the
requirements
of
this
subsection
only
if
18


the
nonpublic
school
offers
a
kindergarten
program.
19


3.
The
following
areas
shall
be
taught
in
grades
one
through
20


six:
English-language
arts,
social
studies,
mathematics,
21


science,
health,
age-appropriate
and
research-based


22


human
growth
and
development,


physical
education,
traffic
23


safety,
music,
and
visual
art
,
and,
subject
to
section
24


279.78,
age-appropriate
and
research-based
human
growth
and
25


development
.
Computer
science
instruction
incorporating
26


the
standards
established
under
section
256.7,
subsection


27


26
,
paragraph
“a”
,
subparagraph
(4),
shall
be
offered
in
28


at
least
one
grade
level
commencing
with
the
school
year
29


beginning
July
1,
2023.
The
health
curriculum
shall
include
30


the
characteristics
of
communicable
diseases
including
acquired
31


immune
deficiency
syndrome.
The
state
board
as
part
of
32


accreditation
standards
shall
adopt
curriculum
definitions
for
33


implementing
the
elementary
program.
34


4.
The
following
shall
be
taught
in
grades
seven
and
35


-1-


LSB
1141XS
(7)
90


jda/jh


1/
10













S.F.
159


eight:
English-language
arts;
social
studies;
mathematics;
1


science;
health;
subject
to
section
279.78,


age-appropriate
and
2


research-based
human
growth
and
development;
career
exploration
3


and
development;
physical
education;
music;
and
visual
art.
4


Computer
science
instruction
incorporating
the
standards
5


established
under
section
256.7,
subsection
26
,
paragraph
“a”
,
6


subparagraph
(4),
shall
be
offered
in
at
least
one
grade
level
7


commencing
with
the
school
year
beginning
July
1,
2023.
Career
8


exploration
and
development
shall
be
designed
so
that
students
9


are
appropriately
prepared
to
create
an
individual
career
10


and
academic
plan
pursuant
to
section
279.61
,
incorporate
11


foundational
career
and
technical
education
concepts
aligned
12


with
the
six
career
and
technical
education
service
areas
13


as
defined
in
subsection
5
,
paragraph
“h”
,
and
incorporate
14


relevant
twenty-first
century
skills.
The
health
curriculum
15


shall
include
age-appropriate
and
research-based
information
16


regarding
the
characteristics
of
sexually
transmitted
diseases,
17


including
HPV
and
the
availability
of
a
vaccine
to
prevent
18


HPV,
and
acquired
immune
deficiency
syndrome.
The
state
board
19


as
part
of
accreditation
standards
shall
adopt
curriculum
20


definitions
for
implementing
the
program
in
grades
seven
21


and
eight.
However,
this
subsection
shall
not
apply
to
the
22


teaching
of
career
exploration
and
development
in
nonpublic
23


schools.
For
purposes
of
this
section
,
“age-appropriate”
,
24


“HPV”
,
and
“research-based”
mean
the
same
as
defined
in
section
25


279.50
.
26


Sec.
3.
Section
256E.7,
subsection
2,
Code
2023,
is
amended


27


by
adding
the
following
new
paragraphs:
28


NEW
PARAGRAPH


.
0j.
Be
subject
to
and
comply
with
29


the
requirements
of
section
279.77
relating
to
parental
30


notifications
and
parental
consent
related
to
certain
screening
31


forms
in
the
same
manner
as
a
school
district.
32


NEW
PARAGRAPH


.
00j.
Be
subject
to
and
comply
with
the
33


requirements
of
section
279.78
relating
to
sexual
orientation
34


and
gender
identity
instruction
in
kindergarten
through
grade
35


-2-


LSB
1141XS
(7)
90


jda/jh


2/
10







S.F.
159


eight
in
the
same
manner
as
a
school
district.
1


Sec.
4.
Section
279.50,
subsections
1
and
2,
Code
2023,
are
2


amended
to
read
as
follows:
3


1.
Each


Subject
to
section
279.78,
each
school
board
shall
4


provide
instruction
in
kindergarten
which
gives
attention
5


to
experiences
relating
to
life
skills
and
human
growth
and
6


development
as
required
in
section
256.11
.
School
districts
7


shall
use
research
provided
in
section
256.9,
subsection
46
,
8


paragraph
“b”
,
to
evaluate
and
upgrade
their
instructional
9


materials
and
teaching
strategies
for
human
growth
and
10


development.
11


2.
Each
school
board
shall
provide
age-appropriate
and
12


research-based
instruction
in
human
growth
and
development
13


including
instruction
regarding
human
sexuality,
self-esteem,
14


stress
management,
interpersonal
relationships,
domestic
15


abuse,
HPV
and
the
availability
of
a
vaccine
to
prevent
HPV,
16


and
acquired
immune
deficiency
syndrome
as
required
in
section
17


256.11
,
in
grades
one


nine
through
twelve.
18


Sec.
5.
Section
279.50,
Code
2023,
is
amended
by
adding
the
19


following
new
subsection:
20


NEW
SUBSECTION


.
1A.
Subject
to
section
279.78,
each
21


school
board
shall
provide
age-appropriate
and
research-based
22


instruction
in
human
growth
and
development
including
23


instruction
regarding
human
sexuality,
self-esteem,
stress
24


management,
interpersonal
relationships,
domestic
abuse,
HPV
25


and
the
availability
of
a
vaccine
to
prevent
HPV,
and
acquired
26


immune
deficiency
syndrome
as
required
in
section
256.11,
in
27


grades
one
through
eight.
28


Sec.
6.
Section
279.76,
Code
2023,
is
amended
by
adding
the
29


following
new
subsection:
30


NEW
SUBSECTION


.
01.
At
the
beginning
of
each
school
year,
31


each
school
district
shall
notify
the
parent
or
guardian
of
32


each
student
enrolled
in
the
school
district
of
all
invasive
33


physical
examinations,
and
student
health
screenings
that
are
34


not
required
by
state
or
federal
law,
that
may
be
provided
in
35


-3-


LSB
1141XS
(7)
90


jda/jh


3/
10










S.F.
159


the
student’s
attendance
center
during
the
school
year.
1


Sec.
7.
Section
279.76,
Code
2023,
is
amended
by
adding
the
2


following
new
subsection:
3


NEW
SUBSECTION


.
1A.
A
parent
or
guardian
providing
written
4


consent
pursuant
to
subsection
1
shall
not
be
construed
to
do
5


any
of
the
following:
6


a.
Prohibit
the
parent
or
guardian
from
accessing
any
7


educational
records
or
health
records
related
to
the
student
8


that
are
created,
maintained,
or
used
by
the
school
district.
9


b.
Prohibit
an
employee
of
the
school
district
from
10


providing
a
notification
required
pursuant
to
section
279.77.
11


Sec.
8.
NEW
SECTION


.
279.77
Student
welfare
——
school
12


district
responsibilities
——
parental
consent
required
for
13


certain
screening
forms.
14


1.
a.
The
board
of
directors
of
a
school
district
shall
15


adopt
policies
that
require
school
district
employees
to
16


notify
the
parent
or
guardian
of
a
student
enrolled
in
the
17


school
district
if
a
change
in
the
student’s
mental
health
or
18


well-being,
emotional
health
or
well-being,
physical
health
or
19


well-being,
or
the
school
district’s
ability
to
provide
a
safe
20


and
supportive
learning
environment
for
the
student
results
in
21


the
school
district
changing
the
services
the
school
district
22


provides
to
the
student
or
the
school
district’s
monitoring
or
23


supervision
of
the
student.
24


b.
The
policies
the
board
of
directors
of
a
school
district
25


adopts
pursuant
to
paragraph
“a”
shall
do
all
of
the
following:
26


(1)
Reinforce
the
fundamental
right
of
parents
and
27


guardians
to
make
decisions
related
to
the
upbringing
and
28


control
of
the
parent’s
or
guardian’s
children.
29


(2)
Require
employees
of
the
school
district
to
encourage
30


the
student
to
discuss
issues
relating
to
the
student’s
mental
31


health
or
well-being,
emotional
health
or
well-being,
physical
32


health
or
well-being,
or
the
learning
environment
within
the
33


school
district
with
the
student’s
parent
or
guardian,
or
to
34


facilitate
such
discussion.


35


-4-


LSB
1141XS
(7)
90


jda/jh


4/
10






S.F.
159


c.
The
policies
the
board
of
directors
of
a
school
district
1


adopts
pursuant
to
paragraph
“a”
shall
not
do
any
of
the
2


following:
3


(1)
Prohibit
parents
or
guardians
from
accessing
any
4


educational
records
or
health
records
related
to
the
student
5


that
are
created,
maintained,
or
used
by
the
school
district.
6


(2)
Encourage,
or
have
the
effect
of
encouraging,
a
student
7


to
withhold
information
from
the
student’s
parent
or
guardian.
8


(3)
Prohibit
or
discourage
an
employee
of
the
school
9


district
from
contacting
the
student’s
parent
or
guardian
10


regarding
critical
decisions
affecting
the
student’s
mental
11


health
or
well-being,
emotional
health
or
well-being,
or
12


physical
health
or
well-being.
13


(4)
Require
an
employee
of
the
school
district
to
provide
14


information
to
the
parent
or
guardian
of
a
student
if
a
15


reasonably
prudent
person
would
determine
that
providing
such
16


information
will
likely
result
in
child
abuse
or
abuse
as
17


defined
in
section
232.68.
18


2.
Before
administering
any
screening
form,
survey,
or
19


questionnaire
to
a
student
enrolled
in
kindergarten
through
20


grade
eight
that
is
related
to
the
student’s
health
or
21


well-being,
a
school
district
must
provide
a
copy
of
the
22


screening
form,
survey,
or
questionnaire
to
the
student’s
23


parent
or
guardian
and
obtain
the
written
consent
of
the
24


parent
or
guardian
to
administer
the
screening
form,
survey,
25


or
questionnaire.
26


Sec.
9.
NEW
SECTION


.
279.78
Sexual
orientation
and
gender
27


identity
——
prohibited
instruction.
28


1.
As
used
in
this
section:
29


a.
“Gender
identity”
means
the
same
as
defined
in
section
30


216.2.


31


b.
“Sexual
orientation”
means
the
same
as
defined
in
section
32


216.2.


33


2.
A
school
district
shall
not
provide
any
program,
34


curriculum,
material,
test,
survey,
questionnaire,
activity,
35


-5-


LSB
1141XS
(7)
90


jda/jh


5/
10





S.F.
159


announcement,
promotion,
or
instruction
of
any
kind
relating
1


to
gender
identity
or
sexual
orientation
to
students
in
2


kindergarten
through
grade
eight.
3


Sec.
10.
NEW
SECTION


.
279.79
Process
for
potential
4


violations
——
human
growth
and
development
instruction,
student
5


welfare,
and
prohibition
on
sexual
orientation
and
gender
6


identity
instruction.
7


1.
A
parent
or
guardian
of
a
student
enrolled
in
a
school
8


district
who
alleges
a
potential
violation
of
section
279.50,
9


subsection
1
or
1A,
section
279.77,
or
section
279.78
by
an
10


employee
or
contractor
of
the
school
district
may
notify
the
11


board
of
directors
of
the
school
district
of
the
potential
12


violation.
13


2.
A
board
of
directors
of
a
school
district
that
receives
14


a
notification
pursuant
to
subsection
1
shall
consult
with
15


the
parent
or
guardian
and,
if
the
board
of
directors
agrees
16


a
potential
violation
of
section
279.50,
subsection
1
or
1A,
17


section
279.77,
or
section
279.78
may
have
occurred,
remedy
the
18


violation
within
thirty
days
after
receipt
of
the
notification
19


pursuant
to
subsection
1.
20


3.
If,
thirty
days
or
more
after
providing
the
notification
21


pursuant
to
subsection
1,
the
parent
or
guardian
reasonably
22


believes
that
the
board
of
directors
of
the
school
district
23


has
not
remedied
the
potential
violation
of
section
279.50,
24


subsection
1
or
1A,
section
279.77,
or
section
279.78,
the
25


parent
or
guardian
may
take
any
of
the
following
actions:
26


a.
Request
that
the
state
board
of
education
appoint
an
27


administrative
law
judge
to
provide
a
recommendation
for
a
28


resolution
of
the
dispute.
Within
thirty
days
after
receipt
29


of
the
request,
the
state
board
of
education
shall
appoint
an
30


administrative
law
judge
who
shall
consider
the
information
31


provided
by
the
school
district
and
the
parent
or
guardian,
32


determine
the
facts
related
to
the
potential
violation,
and
33


provide
a
recommendation
for
a
resolution
of
the
dispute
to
the
34


state
board
of
education.
Within
thirty
days
after
receipt
of
35


-6-


LSB
1141XS
(7)
90


jda/jh


6/
10





S.F.
159


the
administrative
law
judge’s
recommendation,
the
state
board
1


of
education
shall
either
approve
or
reject
the
recommendation.
2


The
decision
of
the
state
board
of
education
shall
be
final.
3


The
school
district
is
responsible
for
all
costs
associated
4


with
the
administrative
proceeding
described
in
this
paragraph.
5


b.
Bring
a
civil
action
for
injunctive
relief,
declaratory
6


relief,
or
damages
against
the
school
district.
If
the
7


parent
or
guardian
is
the
prevailing
party
in
a
civil
action
8


instituted
pursuant
to
this
paragraph,
the
court
shall
award
9


reasonable
court
costs
and
attorney
fees
to
the
parent
or
10


guardian
and
shall
assess
a
civil
penalty
against
the
school
11


district
in
an
amount
not
less
than
ten
thousand
dollars
and
12


not
more
than
fifty
thousand
dollars.
The
court
may
award
13


compensatory
damages
for
injury
and
loss
to
the
parent
or
14


guardian.
15


4.
Each
school
district
shall
annually
provide
to
the
parent
16


or
guardian
of
any
student
enrolled
in
the
school
district
with
17


information
related
to
the
procedure
for
resolving
potential
18


violations
of
section
279.50,
subsection
1
or
1A,
section
19


279.77,
and
section
279.78,
provided
in
this
section.
20


5.
The
state
board
of
education
shall
adopt
rules
pursuant
21


to
chapter
17A
to
administer
this
section.
22


EXPLANATION
23


The
inclusion
of
this
explanation
does
not
constitute
agreement
with
24


the
explanation’s
substance
by
the
members
of
the
general
assembly.
25


This
bill
relates
to
education,
including
modifying
the
26


responsibilities
of
the
state
board
of
education
and
school
27


districts,
prohibiting
instruction
related
to
gender
identity
28


or
sexual
orientation
in
school
districts
and
charter
schools
29


in
kindergarten
through
grade
eight,
and
modifying
provisions
30


associated
with
the
human
growth
and
development
instruction
31


and
health
screenings
provided
in
school
districts,
charter
32


schools,
and
innovation
zone
schools.
33


The
bill
requires
the
state
board
of
education
to
adopt
34


rules
establishing
standards
for
training
programs
related
to
35


-7-


LSB
1141XS
(7)
90


jda/jh


7/
10




S.F.
159


student
support
services
that
are
provided
by
school
districts
1


to
school
district
employees
or
contractors.
2


The
bill
enacts
new
Code
section
279.78,
which
prohibits
3


instruction
related
to
gender
identity
or
sexual
orientation
4


in
school
districts
and
charter
schools
in
kindergarten
5


through
grade
eight.
The
bill
makes
conforming
changes
to
6


Code
sections
256.11
(educational
standards)
and
279.50
(human
7


growth
and
development
instruction)
to
provide
that
the
human
8


growth
and
development
instruction
provided
to
students
in
9


kindergarten
through
grade
eight
shall
not
include
any
program,
10


curriculum,
material,
test,
survey,
questionnaire,
activity,
11


announcement,
promotion,
or
instruction
of
any
kind
relating
12


to
gender
identity
or
sexual
orientation.
The
bill
defines
13


“gender
identity”
and
“sexual
orientation”.
The
bill
requires
14


the
human
growth
and
development
instruction
provided
in
15


kindergarten
to
be
both
age-appropriate
and
research-based.
16


The
bill
requires
each
school
district,
charter
school,
and
17


innovation
zone
school,
at
the
beginning
of
each
school
year,
18


to
notify
the
parent
or
guardian
of
each
student
enrolled
in
19


the
school
district
of
all
invasive
physical
examinations,
and
20


student
health
screenings
that
are
not
required
by
state
or
21


federal
law,
that
may
be
provided
in
the
student’s
attendance
22


center
during
the
school
year.
23


The
bill
enacts
new
Code
section
279.77,
which
requires
24


the
board
of
directors
of
a
school
district
to
adopt
policies
25


that
require
school
district
employees
to
notify
the
parent
26


or
guardian
of
a
student
enrolled
in
the
school
district
if
a
27


change
in
the
student’s
mental
health
or
well-being,
emotional
28


health
or
well-being,
physical
health
or
well-being,
or
the
29


school
district’s
ability
to
provide
a
safe
and
supportive
30


learning
environment
for
the
student
results
in
the
school
31


district
changing
the
services
the
school
district
provides
to
32


the
student
or
the
school
district’s
monitoring
or
supervision
33


of
the
student.
New
Code
section
279.77
establishes
that
these
34


policies
shall
reinforce
the
fundamental
right
of
parents
and
35


-8-


LSB
1141XS
(7)
90


jda/jh


8/
10




S.F.
159


guardians
to
make
decisions
related
to
the
upbringing
and
1


control
of
the
parent’s
or
guardian’s
children
and
require
2


employees
of
the
school
district
to
encourage
the
student
3


to
discuss
issues
relating
to
the
student’s
mental
health
4


or
well-being,
emotional
health
or
well-being,
physical
5


health
or
well-being
or
the
learning
environment
within
the
6


school
district
with
the
student’s
parent
or
guardian,
or
7


facilitate
such
discussion.
New
Code
section
279.77
provides
8


that,
before
administering
any
screening
form
to
a
student
9


enrolled
in
kindergarten
through
grade
eight
that
is
related
10


to
the
student’s
health
or
well-being,
a
school
district
must
11


provide
a
copy
of
the
screening
form
to
the
student’s
parent
12


or
guardian
and
obtain
the
written
consent
of
the
parent
or
13


guardian
to
administer
the
screening
form.
14


The
bill
establishes
that
the
parent
or
guardian
of
a
student
15


enrolled
in
a
school
district
who
alleges
a
violation
of
the
16


bill’s
provisions
related
to
the
human
growth
and
development
17


instruction,
new
Code
section
279.77,
or
new
Code
section
18


279.78
by
an
employee
or
contractor
of
the
school
district
19


may
notify
the
board
of
directors
of
the
school
district
of
20


the
potential
violation.
The
bill
provides
that
a
board
of
21


directors
that
receives
such
a
notification
shall
consult
22


with
the
parent
or
guardian
and,
if
the
board
of
directors
23


agrees
a
potential
violation
may
have
occurred,
remedy
the
24


violation
within
30
days
after
receipt
of
the
notification.
25


The
bill
establishes
that,
if
30
days
or
more
after
providing
26


the
notification
the
parent
or
guardian
reasonably
believes
27


that
the
board
of
directors
has
not
remedied
the
potential
28


violation,
the
parent
or
guardian
may
require
the
state
board
29


of
education
to
appoint
an
administrative
law
judge
to
provide
30


a
recommendation
for
a
resolution
of
the
dispute
or
bring
a
31


civil
action
for
injunctive
relief,
declaratory
relief,
or
32


damages
against
the
school
district.
The
bill
provides
that
33


if
the
parent
or
guardian
is
the
prevailing
party
in
the
civil
34


action,
the
court
shall
assess
a
civil
penalty
against
the
35


-9-


LSB
1141XS
(7)
90


jda/jh


9/
10




S.F.
159


school
district
in
an
amount
not
less
than
$10,000
and
not
1


more
than
$50,000.
The
bill
requires
each
school
district
2


to
annually
provide
to
the
parent
or
guardian
of
any
student
3


enrolled
in
the
school
district
with
information
related
to
the
4


procedure
for
resolving
potential
violations
provided
in
this
5


provision.
The
bill
also
requires
the
state
board
to
adopt
6


rules
to
administer
this
provision.
7


-10-


LSB
1141XS
(7)
90


jda/jh


10/
10




 
 
 



REFERENCE TITLE: student information;
  parental notification; requirements




 
 
 
 
State of
  Arizona
House of
  Representatives
Fifty-sixth
  Legislature
First Regular
  Session
2023
 
 
 




HB 2711




 




Introduced by 
Representatives Kolodin: Chaplik
 



 
 
 
 
 
 
 
An Act
 
amending title
15, chapter 5, article 1, Arizona Revised Statutes, by adding section 15-509;
relating to school employees.
 
 
(TEXT OF BILL BEGINS ON NEXT PAGE)
 




Be it enacted by the Legislature of the State of Arizona:
Section 1. Title 15, chapter 5, article 1,
Arizona Revised Statutes, is amended by adding section 15-509, to read:
START_STATUTE15-509. Student information; parental notification; requirements
A. An employee or independent
contractor of a school district who interacts with students shall disclose to a
student's parent any information that the employee or independent contractor
learns about the student as follows:
1. For information relating to a
student's gender, gender identity, gender pronouns, sexuality, sexual identity
or similar topics, the disclosure shall be made not later than forty-eight
hours after the employee or independent contractor learns about the
information.
2. For any other information about
the student, the disclosure shall be made on request by the student's parent.
B. Each school district governing
board shall adopt policies to implement this section. END_STATUTE



MISSISSIPPI LEGISLATURE
2023 Regular Session
To: Judiciary A
By: Representative Ford (73rd)
House Bill 1074
AN ACT TO ENACT THE TITLE IX PRESERVATION ACT; TO PROVIDE INTERPRETATION
AND CLARIFICATION OF CERTAIN TERMS RELATING TO TITLE IX OF THE FEDERAL CODE; TO
STATE LEGISLATIVE INTENT; TO CLARIFY TERMS FOR THE PURPOSES OF STATE LAW; TO
PROVIDE THAT POLICIES AND LAWS THAT DISTINGUISH BETWEEN THE SEXES ARE SUBJECT
TO INTERMEDIATE CONSTITUTIONAL SCRUTINY; TO REQUIRE ANY PUBLIC SCHOOL, SCHOOL DISTRICT,
STATE OR LOCAL AGENCY, DEPARTMENT OR OFFICE THAT COLLECTS VITAL STATISTICS FOR THE
PURPOSE OF COMPLYING WITH ANTI-DISCRIMINATION LAWS OR FOR THE PURPOSE OF GATHERING
ACCURATE PUBLIC HEALTH, CRIME, ECONOMIC OR OTHER DATA TO IDENTIFY EACH INDIVIDUAL
WHO IS PART OF THE COLLECTED DATA SET AS EITHER MALE OR FEMALE AT BIRTH; AND
FOR RELATED PURPOSES.
     BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE
OF THE STATE OF MISSISSIPPI:
     SECTION 1.  This
act shall be known and may be cited as "The Title IX Preservation Act."
     SECTION 2.  The
Legislature finds and declares that:
          (a)  Males and females
possess unique and immutable biological differences that manifest prior to
birth and increase as they age and experience puberty;
          (b)  Biological
differences between the sexes mean that only females are able to get pregnant,
give birth and breastfeed children;
          (c)  Biological
differences between the sexes mean that males are, on average, bigger, stronger,
and faster than females;
          (d)  Biological differences
between the sexes leave females more physically vulnerable than males to
specific forms of violence, including sexual violence;
          (e)  Females have historically
suffered from discrimination in education, athletics and employment;
          (f)  Biological differences
between the sexes are enduring and may, in some circumstances, warrant the creation
of separate social, educational, athletic, or other spaces in order to ensure safety
and/or to allow members of each sex to succeed and thrive;
          (g)  Inconsistencies in
court rulings and policy initiatives with respect to the definitions of "sex,"
"male," "female," "man," and "woman" have
led to the endangerment of single-sex spaces and resources, thereby
necessitating clarification of certain terms.
     SECTION 3.  For
the purposes of state law:
          (a)  A person's "sex"
is defined as his or her biological sex (either male or female) at birth;
          (b)  A "female"
is an individual whose biological reproductive system is developed to produce ova;
a "male" is an individual whose biological reproductive system is developed
to fertilize the ova of a female;
          (c)  The terms "woman"
and "girl" refer to human females, and the terms "man" and "boy"
refer to human males; and
          (d)  The term "mother"
is defined as a parent of the female sex, and the term "father" is defined
as a parent of the male sex.
     SECTION 4.  There
are legitimate reasons to distinguish between the sexes with respect to
athletics, prisons, or other detention facilities, domestic violence shelters, rape
crisis centers, locker rooms, restrooms, and other areas where biology, safety
and/or privacy are implicated.
     SECTION 5.  Policies
and laws that distinguish between the sexes are subject to intermediate constitutional
scrutiny which forbids unfair discrimination against similarly-situated males and
females but allows the law to distinguish between the sexes where such
distinctions are substantially related to important governmental objectives.
     SECTION 6.  Any
public school or school district and any state or local agency, department, or office
that collects vital statistics for the purpose of complying with anti-discrimination
laws or for the purpose of gathering accurate public health, crime, economic or
other data shall identify each individual who is part of the collected data set
as either male or female at birth.
     SECTION 7.  (1) 
Any person employed by any public school, school district, state or local agency,
department or office shall not be required to address any other employee or
student enrolled with such entity by any pronoun, salutation, greeting, or other
terminology that is inconsistent with that person's sex as defined herein.
     (2)  A public school, school
district, state or local agency, department or office shall not be required to
permit an employee or student to dress in a manner inconsistent with professional
standards of dress generally prevailing in the community for persons of the
same sex, as defined herein, of that person or student.
     SECTION 8.  This act
shall take effect and be in force from and after July 1, 2023.





       Florida Senate - 2023                                     SB 952
       
       
        
       By Senator Ingoglia
       
       
       
       
       
       11-00444D-23                                           2023952__
    1                        A bill to be entitled                      
    2         An act relating to employer coverage of gender
    3         dysphoria treatment; providing a short title; creating
    4         s. 448.085, F.S.; defining terms; requiring employers
    5         that provide coverage of gender dysphoria treatment to
    6         also cover the full costs associated with treatment
    7         that reverses such gender dysphoria treatment,
    8         regardless of the rate of coverage provided for the
    9         initial treatment; providing that employees who
   10         receive gender dysphoria treatment through coverage
   11         provided by an employer are entitled to full coverage
   12         of total costs associated with treatment that reverses
   13         such gender dysphoria treatment under certain
   14         circumstances, regardless of whether they are still
   15         employed by that employer; providing construction;
   16         prohibiting employers from making coverage of the
   17         subsequent treatment contingent on whether the
   18         employee receives such treatment in this state;
   19         creating a right of action for aggrieved persons to
   20         recover actual total costs and damages from an
   21         employer or former employer, as applicable, under
   22         certain circumstances; providing an effective date.
   23          
   24  Be It Enacted by the Legislature of the State of Florida:
   25  
   26         Section 1. This act may be referred to as the “Reverse Woke
   27  Act.”
   28         Section 2. Section 448.085, Florida Statutes, is created to
   29  read:
   30         448.085 Coverage of gender dysphoria treatment.—
   31         (1) As used in this section, the term:
   32         (a) “Employee” means any individual who performs services
   33  for and under the direction and control of an employer for wages
   34  or other remuneration.
   35         (b) “Employer” means any individual, firm, partnership,
   36  institution, corporation, or association that employs two or
   37  more employees. The term includes governmental entities as
   38  defined in s. 768.38.
   39         (c) “Gender dysphoria treatment” means surgery, hormone
   40  replacement therapy, or any other procedure or treatment that
   41  assists persons with gender dysphoria in transitioning to their
   42  self-identified gender.
   43         (2) An employer that covers the cost, directly or through
   44  benefits, of gender dysphoria treatment for employees must also
   45  cover the total costs associated with treatment that reverses
   46  the gender dysphoria treatment, regardless of the rate of
   47  coverage provided for the initial treatment.
   48         (3) An employee who received gender dysphoria treatment
   49  through coverage provided by an employer is entitled to full
   50  coverage by that employer of the total costs associated with
   51  treatment that reverses gender dysphoria treatment if the
   52  employee later determines that the gender dysphoria treatment
   53  was not appropriate for him or her and wants to reverse the
   54  treatment, regardless of whether the person is currently
   55  employed by that same employer at the time of such
   56  determination.
   57         (4) An employer’s obligations under this section are not
   58  affected by whether the initial treatment is provided in this
   59  state, and an employer may not make coverage of subsequent
   60  treatment contingent on whether the employee receives such
   61  subsequent treatment in this state.
   62         (5) If an employer or former employer, as applicable,
   63  refuses to cover the total costs associated with treatment to
   64  reverse gender dysphoria treatment it initially covered for an
   65  employee, the employee entitled to such coverage under
   66  subsection (3) may file a civil action in a court of competent
   67  jurisdiction to recover from the employer or former employer, as
   68  applicable, the actual total costs associated with such
   69  treatment as well as any damages incurred by the person as a
   70  result of the employer’s noncompliance with this section.
   71         Section 3. This act shall take effect July 1, 2023.





 
88R4257 EAS-D


 


 

		By: Schatzline
H.B. No. 1532




 


 



 		
			

A BILL TO BE ENTITLED




 
			

AN ACT




 
			
relating to professional liability insurance coverage for and 



 
			
prohibitions on the provision to certain children of procedures and 



 
			
treatments for gender transitioning, gender reassignment, or 



 
			
gender dysphoria and to the abuse of a child.



 
			
       BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF TEXAS:



 
			
       SECTION 1.  Section 261.001(1), Family Code, is amended to 



 
			
read as follows:



 
			
             (1)  "Abuse" includes the following acts or omissions 



 
			
by a person:



 
			
                   (A)  mental or emotional injury to a child that 



 
			
results in an observable and material impairment in the child's 



 
			
growth, development, or psychological functioning;



 
			
                   (B)  causing or permitting the child to be in a 



 
			
situation in which the child sustains a mental or emotional injury 



 
			
that results in an observable and material impairment in the 



 
			
child's growth, development, or psychological functioning;



 
			
                   (C)  physical injury that results in substantial 



 
			
harm to the child, or the genuine threat of substantial harm from 



 
			
physical injury to the child, including an injury that is at 



 
			
variance with the history or explanation given and excluding an 



 
			
accident or reasonable discipline by a parent, guardian, or 



 
			
managing or possessory conservator that does not expose the child 



 
			
to a substantial risk of harm;



 
			
                   (D)  failure to make a reasonable effort to 



 
			
prevent an action by another person that results in physical injury 



 
			
that results in substantial harm to the child;



 
			
                   (E)  sexual conduct harmful to a child's mental, 



 
			
emotional, or physical welfare, including conduct that constitutes 



 
			
the offense of continuous sexual abuse of young child or disabled 



 
			
individual under Section 21.02, Penal Code, indecency with a child 



 
			
under Section 21.11, Penal Code, sexual assault under Section 



 
			
22.011, Penal Code, or aggravated sexual assault under Section 



 
			
22.021, Penal Code;



 
			
                   (F)  failure to make a reasonable effort to 



 
			
prevent sexual conduct harmful to a child;



 
			
                   (G)  compelling or encouraging the child to engage 



 
			
in sexual conduct as defined by Section 43.01, Penal Code, 



 
			
including compelling or encouraging the child in a manner that 



 
			
constitutes an offense of trafficking of persons under Section 



 
			
20A.02(a)(7) or (8), Penal Code, solicitation of prostitution under 



 
			
Section 43.021, Penal Code, or compelling prostitution under 



 
			
Section 43.05(a)(2), Penal Code;



 
			
                   (H)  causing, permitting, encouraging, engaging 



 
			
in, or allowing the photographing, filming, or depicting of the 



 
			
child if the person knew or should have known that the resulting 



 
			
photograph, film, or depiction of the child is obscene as defined by 



 
			
Section 43.21, Penal Code, or pornographic;



 
			
                   (I)  the current use by a person of a controlled 



 
			
substance as defined by Chapter 481, Health and Safety Code, in a 



 
			
manner or to the extent that the use results in physical, mental, or 



 
			
emotional injury to a child;



 
			
                   (J)  causing, expressly permitting, or 



 
			
encouraging a child to use a controlled substance as defined by 



 
			
Chapter 481, Health and Safety Code;



 
			
                   (K)  causing, permitting, encouraging, engaging 



 
			
in, or allowing a sexual performance by a child as defined by 



 
			
Section 43.25, Penal Code;



 
			
                   (L)  knowingly causing, permitting, encouraging, 



 
			
engaging in, or allowing a child to be trafficked in a manner 



 
			
punishable as an offense under Section 20A.02(a)(5), (6), (7), or 



 
			
(8), Penal Code, or the failure to make a reasonable effort to 



 
			
prevent a child from being trafficked in a manner punishable as an 



 
			
offense under any of those sections; [or]



 
			
                   (M)  forcing or coercing a child to enter into a 



 
			
marriage; or 



 
			
                   (N)  providing to a child a gender transitioning 



 
			
or gender reassignment treatment or performing on a child a gender 



 
			
transitioning or gender reassignment procedure that is prohibited 



 
			
by Subchapter X, Chapter 161, Health and Safety Code.



 
			
       SECTION 2.  Chapter 161, Health and Safety Code, is amended 



 
			
by adding Subchapter X to read as follows:



 
			
SUBCHAPTER X.  GENDER TRANSITIONING AND GENDER REASSIGNMENT 



 
			
PROCEDURES AND TREATMENTS FOR CERTAIN CHILDREN



 
			
       Sec. 161.701.  DEFINITIONS.  In this subchapter:



 
			
             (1)  "Child" means an individual who is younger than 18 



 
			
years of age.



 
			
             (2)  "Health care provider" means a person other than a 



 
			
physician who is licensed, certified, or otherwise authorized by 



 
			
the laws of this state to provide or render health care or to 



 
			
dispense or prescribe a prescription drug in the ordinary course of 



 
			
business or practice of a profession.



 
			
             (3)  "Physician" means a person licensed to practice 



 
			
medicine in this state.



 
			
       Sec. 161.702.  PROHIBITED PROVISION OF GENDER TRANSITIONING 



 
			
OR GENDER REASSIGNMENT PROCEDURES AND TREATMENTS TO CERTAIN 



 
			
CHILDREN.  For the purpose of transitioning a child's biological 



 
			
sex as determined by the sex organs, chromosomes, and endogenous 



 
			
profiles of the child or affirming the child's perception of the 



 
			
child's sex if that perception is inconsistent with the child's 



 
			
biological sex, a physician or health care provider may not:



 
			
             (1)  perform a surgery to sterilize the child, 



 
			
including:



 
			
                   (A)  castration;



 
			
                   (B)  vasectomy;



 
			
                   (C)  hysterectomy;



 
			
                   (D)  oophorectomy;



 
			
                   (E)  metoidioplasty;



 
			
                   (F)  orchiectomy;



 
			
                   (G)  penectomy;



 
			
                   (H)  phalloplasty; and



 
			
                   (I)  vaginoplasty;



 
			
             (2)  perform a mastectomy;



 
			
             (3)  provide, administer, prescribe, or dispense any of 



 
			
the following prescription drugs that induce transient or permanent 



 
			
infertility:



 
			
                   (A)  puberty suppression or blocking prescription 



 
			
drugs to stop or delay normal puberty;



 
			
                   (B)  supraphysiologic doses of testosterone to 



 
			
females; or



 
			
                   (C)  supraphysiologic doses of estrogen to males; 



 
			
or



 
			
             (4)  remove any otherwise healthy or non-diseased body 



 
			
part or tissue.



 
			
       Sec. 161.703.  EXCEPTIONS.  The prohibitions under Section 



 
			
161.702 do not apply to the provision by a physician or health care 



 
			
provider, with the consent of the child's parent or legal guardian, 



 
			
of appropriate and medically necessary gender transitioning or 



 
			
gender reassignment procedures or treatments to a child who:



 
			
             (1)  is born with a medically verifiable genetic 



 
			
disorder of sex development, including:



 
			
                   (A)  46, XX chromosomes with virilization;



 
			
                   (B)  46, XY chromosomes with undervirilization; 



 
			
or



 
			
                   (C)  both ovarian and testicular tissue; or



 
			
             (2)  does not have the normal sex chromosome structure 



 
			
for male or female as determined by a physician through genetic 



 
			
testing.



 
			
       Sec. 161.704.  DISCIPLINARY ACTION.  The Texas Medical Board 



 
			
or another state regulatory agency with jurisdiction over a 



 
			
physician or health care provider subject to Section 161.702 shall 



 
			
revoke the license, certification, or authorization of a physician 



 
			
or health care provider who the board or agency determines has 



 
			
violated that section.



 
			
       SECTION 3.  Subchapter F, Chapter 1901, Insurance Code, is 



 
			
amended by adding Section 1901.256 to read as follows:



 
			
       Sec. 1901.256.  PROHIBITED COVERAGE FOR PROVISION OF CERTAIN 



 
			
GENDER-RELATED PROCEDURES AND TREATMENTS TO CERTAIN CHILDREN.  A 



 
			
professional liability insurance policy issued to a physician or 



 
			
health care provider may not include coverage for damages assessed 



 
			
against the physician or health care provider who provides to a 



 
			
child gender transitioning or gender reassignment procedures or 



 
			
treatments that are prohibited by Section 161.702, Health and 



 
			
Safety Code.



 
			
       SECTION 4.  Section 164.052, Occupations Code, is amended by 



 
			
amending Subsection (a) and adding Subsection (d) to read as 



 
			
follows:



 
			
       (a)  A physician or an applicant for a license to practice 



 
			
medicine commits a prohibited practice if that person:



 
			
             (1)  submits to the board a false or misleading 



 
			
statement, document, or certificate in an application for a 



 
			
license;



 
			
             (2)  presents to the board a license, certificate, or 



 
			
diploma that was illegally or fraudulently obtained;



 
			
             (3)  commits fraud or deception in taking or passing an 



 
			
examination;



 
			
             (4)  uses alcohol or drugs in an intemperate manner 



 
			
that, in the board's opinion, could endanger a patient's life;



 
			
             (5)  commits unprofessional or dishonorable conduct 



 
			
that is likely to deceive or defraud the public, as provided by 



 
			
Section 164.053, or injure the public;



 
			
             (6)  uses an advertising statement that is false, 



 
			
misleading, or deceptive;



 
			
             (7)  advertises professional superiority or the 



 
			
performance of professional service in a superior manner if that 



 
			
advertising is not readily subject to verification;



 
			
             (8)  purchases, sells, barters, or uses, or offers to 



 
			
purchase, sell, barter, or use, a medical degree, license, 



 
			
certificate, or diploma, or a transcript of a license, certificate, 



 
			
or diploma in or incident to an application to the board for a 



 
			
license to practice medicine;



 
			
             (9)  alters, with fraudulent intent, a medical license, 



 
			
certificate, or diploma, or a transcript of a medical license, 



 
			
certificate, or diploma;



 
			
             (10)  uses a medical license, certificate, or diploma, 



 
			
or a transcript of a medical license, certificate, or diploma that 



 
			
has been:



 
			
                   (A)  fraudulently purchased or issued;



 
			
                   (B)  counterfeited; or



 
			
                   (C)  materially altered;



 
			
             (11)  impersonates or acts as proxy for another person 



 
			
in an examination required by this subtitle for a medical license;



 
			
             (12)  engages in conduct that subverts or attempts to 



 
			
subvert an examination process required by this subtitle for a 



 
			
medical license;



 
			
             (13)  impersonates a physician or permits another to 



 
			
use the person's license or certificate to practice medicine in 



 
			
this state;



 
			
             (14)  directly or indirectly employs a person whose 



 
			
license to practice medicine has been suspended, canceled, or 



 
			
revoked;



 
			
             (15)  associates in the practice of medicine with a 



 
			
person:



 
			
                   (A)  whose license to practice medicine has been 



 
			
suspended, canceled, or revoked; or



 
			
                   (B)  who has been convicted of the unlawful 



 
			
practice of medicine in this state or elsewhere;



 
			
             (16)  performs or procures a criminal abortion, aids or 



 
			
abets in the procuring of a criminal abortion, attempts to perform 



 
			
or procure a criminal abortion, or attempts to aid or abet the 



 
			
performance or procurement of a criminal abortion;



 
			
             (17)  directly or indirectly aids or abets the practice 



 
			
of medicine by a person, partnership, association, or corporation 



 
			
that is not licensed to practice medicine by the board;



 
			
             (18)  performs an abortion on a woman who is pregnant 



 
			
with a viable unborn child during the third trimester of the 



 
			
pregnancy unless:



 
			
                   (A)  the abortion is necessary to prevent the 



 
			
death of the woman;



 
			
                   (B)  the viable unborn child has a severe, 



 
			
irreversible brain impairment; or



 
			
                   (C)  the woman is diagnosed with a significant 



 
			
likelihood of suffering imminent severe, irreversible brain damage 



 
			
or imminent severe, irreversible paralysis;



 
			
             (19)  performs an abortion on an unemancipated minor 



 
			
without the written consent of the child's parent, managing 



 
			
conservator, or legal guardian or without a court order, as 



 
			
provided by Section 33.003 or 33.004, Family Code, unless the 



 
			
abortion is necessary due to a medical emergency, as defined by 



 
			
Section 171.002, Health and Safety Code;



 
			
             (20)  otherwise performs an abortion on an 



 
			
unemancipated minor in violation of Chapter 33, Family Code;



 
			
             (21)  performs or induces or attempts to perform or 



 
			
induce an abortion in violation of Subchapter C, F, or G, Chapter 



 
			
171, Health and Safety Code;



 
			
             (22)  in complying with the procedures outlined in 



 
			
Sections 166.045 and 166.046, Health and Safety Code, wilfully 



 
			
fails to make a reasonable effort to transfer a patient to a 



 
			
physician who is willing to comply with a directive; [or]



 
			
             (23)  performs or delegates to another individual the 



 
			
performance of a pelvic examination on an anesthetized or 



 
			
unconscious patient in violation of Section 167A.002, Health and 



 
			
Safety Code; or



 
			
             (24)  for the purpose of facilitating the gender 



 
			
transition or treating the gender dysphoria of an unemancipated 



 
			
minor:



 
			
                   (A)  provides, administers, prescribes, or 



 
			
dispenses a puberty suppression or blocking prescription drug or 



 
			
cross-sex hormone to the minor, including by writing a false or 



 
			
fictitious prescription; or



 
			
                   (B)  performs or attempts to perform a surgical 



 
			
intervention on the minor.



 
			
       (d)  Notwithstanding Subsection (a)(24), a physician or 



 
			
applicant for a license to practice medicine does not commit a 



 
			
prohibited practice if the physician or applicant provides a 



 
			
puberty suppression or blocking prescription drug to an 



 
			
unemancipated minor for the purpose of normalizing puberty for a 



 
			
minor experiencing precocious puberty.



 
			
       SECTION 5.  Section 1901.256, Insurance Code, as added by 



 
			
this Act, applies only to a medical professional liability 



 
			
insurance policy that is delivered, issued for delivery, or renewed 



 
			
on or after January 1, 2024. An insurance policy that is delivered, 



 
			
issued for delivery, or renewed before January 1, 2024, is governed 



 
			
by the law in effect immediately before the effective date of this 



 
			
Act, and that law is continued in effect for that purpose.



 
			
       SECTION 6.  Section 164.052, Occupations Code, as amended by 



 
			
this Act, applies only to conduct that occurs on or after the 



 
			
effective date of this Act. Conduct that occurs before the 



 
			
effective date of this Act is governed by the law in effect on the 



 
			
date the conduct occurred, and the former law is continued in effect 



 
			
for that purpose.



 
			
       SECTION 7.  This Act takes effect September 1, 2023.





 
88R4402 EAS-F


 


 

		By: Campbell
S.B. No. 625




 


 



 		
			

A BILL TO BE ENTITLED




 
			

AN ACT




 
			
relating to prohibitions on the provision to certain children of 



 
			
procedures and treatments for gender transitioning, gender 



 
			
reassignment, or gender dysphoria and on the use of public money or 



 
			
public assistance to provide those procedures and treatments.



 
			
       BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF TEXAS:



 
			
       SECTION 1.  Section 62.151, Health and Safety Code, is 



 
			
amended by adding Subsection (g) to read as follows:



 
			
       (g)  The child health plan may not provide coverage for 



 
			
services prohibited by Section 161.702 that are intended to 



 
			
transition a child's biological sex as determined by the child's sex 



 
			
organs, chromosomes, and endogenous profiles.



 
			
       SECTION 2.  Chapter 161, Health and Safety Code, is amended 



 
			
by adding Subchapter X to read as follows:



 
			
SUBCHAPTER X.  GENDER TRANSITIONING AND GENDER REASSIGNMENT 



 
			
PROCEDURES AND TREATMENTS FOR CERTAIN CHILDREN



 
			
       Sec. 161.701.  DEFINITIONS.  In this subchapter:



 
			
             (1)  "Child" means an individual who is younger than 18 



 
			
years of age.



 
			
             (2)  "Health care provider" means a person other than a 



 
			
physician who is licensed, certified, or otherwise authorized by 



 
			
this state's laws to provide or render health care or to dispense or 



 
			
prescribe a prescription drug in the ordinary course of business or 



 
			
practice of a profession.



 
			
             (3)  "Medicaid" means the medical assistance program 



 
			
established under Chapter 32, Human Resources Code.



 
			
             (4)  "Physician" means a person licensed to practice 



 
			
medicine in this state.



 
			
       Sec. 161.702.  PROHIBITED PROVISION OF GENDER TRANSITIONING 



 
			
OR GENDER REASSIGNMENT PROCEDURES AND TREATMENTS TO CERTAIN 



 
			
CHILDREN.  For the purpose of transitioning a child's biological 



 
			
sex as determined by the sex organs, chromosomes, and endogenous 



 
			
profiles of the child or affirming the child's perception of the 



 
			
child's sex if that perception is inconsistent with the child's 



 
			
biological sex, a physician or health care provider may not 



 
			
knowingly:



 
			
             (1)  perform a surgery that sterilizes the child, 



 
			
including:



 
			
                   (A)  castration;



 
			
                   (B)  vasectomy;



 
			
                   (C)  hysterectomy;



 
			
                   (D)  oophorectomy;



 
			
                   (E)  metoidioplasty;



 
			
                   (F)  orchiectomy;



 
			
                   (G)  penectomy;



 
			
                   (H)  phalloplasty; and



 
			
                   (I)  vaginoplasty;



 
			
             (2)  perform a mastectomy;



 
			
             (3)  provide, prescribe, administer, or dispense any of 



 
			
the following prescription drugs that induce transient or permanent 



 
			
infertility:



 
			
                   (A)  puberty suppression or blocking prescription 



 
			
drugs to stop or delay normal puberty;



 
			
                   (B)  supraphysiologic doses of testosterone to 



 
			
females; or



 
			
                   (C)  supraphysiologic doses of estrogen to males; 



 
			
or



 
			
             (4)  remove any otherwise healthy or non-diseased body 



 
			
part or tissue.



 
			
       Sec. 161.703.  EXCEPTIONS.  Section 161.702 does not apply 



 
			
to the provision by a physician or health care provider, with the 



 
			
consent of the child's parent or legal guardian, of:



 
			
             (1)  puberty suppression or blocking prescription 



 
			
drugs for the purpose of normalizing puberty for a minor 



 
			
experiencing precocious puberty; or



 
			
             (2)  appropriate and medically necessary procedures or 



 
			
treatments to a child who:



 
			
                   (A)  is born with a medically verifiable genetic 



 
			
disorder of sex development, including:



 
			
                         (i)  46,XX chromosomes with virilization;



 
			
                         (ii)  46,XY chromosomes with 



 
			
undervirilization; or



 
			
                         (iii)  both ovarian and testicular tissue; 



 
			
or



 
			
                   (B)  does not have the normal sex chromosome 



 
			
structure for male or female as determined by a physician through 



 
			
genetic testing.



 
			
       Sec. 161.704.  PROHIBITED USE OF PUBLIC MONEY.  Public money 



 
			
may not directly or indirectly be used, granted, paid, or 



 
			
distributed to any health care provider, medical school, hospital, 



 
			
physician, or any other entity, organization, or individual that 



 
			
provides or facilitates the provision of a procedure or treatment 



 
			
to a child that is prohibited under Section 161.702.



 
			
       Sec. 161.705.  PROHIBITED STATE HEALTH PLAN REIMBURSEMENT.  



 
			
The commission may not provide Medicaid reimbursement and the child 



 
			
health plan program established by Chapter 62 may not provide 



 
			
reimbursement to a physician or health care provider for provision 



 
			
of a procedure or treatment to a child that is prohibited under 



 
			
Section 161.702.



 
			
       Sec. 161.706.  ATTORNEY GENERAL ENFORCEMENT.  (a)  If the 



 
			
attorney general has reason to believe that a person is committing, 



 
			
has committed, or is about to commit a violation of Section 161.702, 



 
			
the attorney general may bring an action to enforce this subchapter 



 
			
to restrain or enjoin the person from committing, continuing to 



 
			
commit, or repeating the violation.



 
			
       (b)  Venue for an action brought under this section is in a 



 
			
district court of Travis County or the county where the violation 



 
			
occurred or is about to occur. 



 
			
       SECTION 3.  Section 32.024, Human Resources Code, is amended 



 
			
by adding Subsection (pp) to read as follows:



 
			
       (pp)  The medical assistance program may not provide 



 
			
coverage for services prohibited by Section 161.702, Health and 



 
			
Safety Code, that are intended to transition a child's biological 



 
			
sex as determined by the child's sex organs, chromosomes, and 



 
			
endogenous profiles.



 
			
       SECTION 4.  Section 164.052(a), Occupations Code, is amended 



 
			
to read as follows:



 
			
       (a)  A physician or an applicant for a license to practice 



 
			
medicine commits a prohibited practice if that person:



 
			
             (1)  submits to the board a false or misleading 



 
			
statement, document, or certificate in an application for a 



 
			
license;



 
			
             (2)  presents to the board a license, certificate, or 



 
			
diploma that was illegally or fraudulently obtained;



 
			
             (3)  commits fraud or deception in taking or passing an 



 
			
examination;



 
			
             (4)  uses alcohol or drugs in an intemperate manner 



 
			
that, in the board's opinion, could endanger a patient's life;



 
			
             (5)  commits unprofessional or dishonorable conduct 



 
			
that is likely to deceive or defraud the public, as provided by 



 
			
Section 164.053, or injure the public;



 
			
             (6)  uses an advertising statement that is false, 



 
			
misleading, or deceptive;



 
			
             (7)  advertises professional superiority or the 



 
			
performance of professional service in a superior manner if that 



 
			
advertising is not readily subject to verification;



 
			
             (8)  purchases, sells, barters, or uses, or offers to 



 
			
purchase, sell, barter, or use, a medical degree, license, 



 
			
certificate, or diploma, or a transcript of a license, certificate, 



 
			
or diploma in or incident to an application to the board for a 



 
			
license to practice medicine;



 
			
             (9)  alters, with fraudulent intent, a medical license, 



 
			
certificate, or diploma, or a transcript of a medical license, 



 
			
certificate, or diploma;



 
			
             (10)  uses a medical license, certificate, or diploma, 



 
			
or a transcript of a medical license, certificate, or diploma that 



 
			
has been:



 
			
                   (A)  fraudulently purchased or issued;



 
			
                   (B)  counterfeited; or



 
			
                   (C)  materially altered;



 
			
             (11)  impersonates or acts as proxy for another person 



 
			
in an examination required by this subtitle for a medical license;



 
			
             (12)  engages in conduct that subverts or attempts to 



 
			
subvert an examination process required by this subtitle for a 



 
			
medical license;



 
			
             (13)  impersonates a physician or permits another to 



 
			
use the person's license or certificate to practice medicine in 



 
			
this state;



 
			
             (14)  directly or indirectly employs a person whose 



 
			
license to practice medicine has been suspended, canceled, or 



 
			
revoked;



 
			
             (15)  associates in the practice of medicine with a 



 
			
person:



 
			
                   (A)  whose license to practice medicine has been 



 
			
suspended, canceled, or revoked; or



 
			
                   (B)  who has been convicted of the unlawful 



 
			
practice of medicine in this state or elsewhere;



 
			
             (16)  performs or procures a criminal abortion, aids or 



 
			
abets in the procuring of a criminal abortion, attempts to perform 



 
			
or procure a criminal abortion, or attempts to aid or abet the 



 
			
performance or procurement of a criminal abortion;



 
			
             (17)  directly or indirectly aids or abets the practice 



 
			
of medicine by a person, partnership, association, or corporation 



 
			
that is not licensed to practice medicine by the board;



 
			
             (18)  performs an abortion on a woman who is pregnant 



 
			
with a viable unborn child during the third trimester of the 



 
			
pregnancy unless:



 
			
                   (A)  the abortion is necessary to prevent the 



 
			
death of the woman;



 
			
                   (B)  the viable unborn child has a severe, 



 
			
irreversible brain impairment; or



 
			
                   (C)  the woman is diagnosed with a significant 



 
			
likelihood of suffering imminent severe, irreversible brain damage 



 
			
or imminent severe, irreversible paralysis;



 
			
             (19)  performs an abortion on an unemancipated minor 



 
			
without the written consent of the child's parent, managing 



 
			
conservator, or legal guardian or without a court order, as 



 
			
provided by Section 33.003 or 33.004, Family Code, unless the 



 
			
abortion is necessary due to a medical emergency, as defined by 



 
			
Section 171.002, Health and Safety Code;



 
			
             (20)  otherwise performs an abortion on an 



 
			
unemancipated minor in violation of Chapter 33, Family Code;



 
			
             (21)  performs or induces or attempts to perform or 



 
			
induce an abortion in violation of Subchapter C, F, or G, Chapter 



 
			
171, Health and Safety Code;



 
			
             (22)  in complying with the procedures outlined in 



 
			
Sections 166.045 and 166.046, Health and Safety Code, wilfully 



 
			
fails to make a reasonable effort to transfer a patient to a 



 
			
physician who is willing to comply with a directive; [or]



 
			
             (23)  performs or delegates to another individual the 



 
			
performance of a pelvic examination on an anesthetized or 



 
			
unconscious patient in violation of Section 167A.002, Health and 



 
			
Safety Code; or



 
			
             (24)  performs a gender transitioning or gender 



 
			
reassignment procedure or treatment in violation of Section 



 
			
161.702, Health and Safety Code.



 
			
       SECTION 5.  Subchapter B, Chapter 164, Occupations Code, is 



 
			
amended by adding Section 164.0552 to read as follows:



 
			
       Sec. 164.0552.  PROHIBITED ACTS REGARDING GENDER 



 
			
TRANSITIONING OR GENDER REASSIGNMENT PROCEDURES AND TREATMENTS ON 



 
			
CERTAIN CHILDREN.  (a)  The board shall revoke the license or other 



 
			
authorization to practice medicine of a physician who violates 



 
			
Section 161.702, Health and Safety Code.  The board shall refuse to 



 
			
admit to examination or refuse to issue a license or renewal license 



 
			
to a person who violates that section.



 
			
       (b)  The sanctions provided by Subsection (a) are in addition 



 
			
to any other grounds for revocation of a license or other 



 
			
authorization to practice medicine or for refusal to admit persons 



 
			
to examination under this subtitle or to issue a license or renew a 



 
			
license to practice medicine under this subtitle.



 
			
       SECTION 6.  Section 164.052, Occupations Code, as amended by 



 
			
this Act, and Section 164.0552, Occupations Code, as added by this 



 
			
Act, apply only to conduct that occurs on or after the effective 



 
			
date of this Act.  Conduct that occurs before the effective date of 



 
			
this Act is governed by the law in effect on the date the conduct 



 
			
occurred, and the former law is continued in effect for that 



 
			
purpose.



 
			
       SECTION 7.  If before implementing any provision of this Act 



 
			
a state agency determines that a waiver or authorization from a 



 
			
federal agency is necessary for implementation of that provision, 



 
			
the agency affected by the provision shall request the waiver or 



 
			
authorization and may delay implementing that provision until the 



 
			
waiver or authorization is granted.



 
			
       SECTION 8.  This Act takes effect December 1, 2023.




 
 
PREFILED JAN 06 2023



REFERENCE TITLE: state monies; drag
  shows; minors




 
 
 
 
State of
  Arizona
Senate
Fifty-sixth
  Legislature
First Regular
  Session
2023
 
 
 




SB 1026




 




Introduced by 
Senator Kavanagh
 



 
 
 
 
 
 
 
An Act
 
amending
title 35, chapter 1, article 5, Arizona Revised Statutes, by adding section
35-196.06; amending section 35-197, Arizona Revised Statutes; relating to
the prohibited use of state monies.
 
 
(TEXT OF BILL BEGINS ON NEXT PAGE)
 




Be it enacted by the Legislature of the State of Arizona:
Section 1. Title 35, chapter 1, article 5,
Arizona Revised Statutes, is amended by adding section 35-196.06, to read:
START_STATUTE35-196.06. Use of state monies prohibited; drag shows targeting minors;
definition
A. Notwithstanding any other law, tax
monies of this state, federal monies passing through the state treasury or any
other state monies may not be used by any person or entity, including any state-funded
institution or facility, for a drag show targeting minors.
B. Notwithstanding any other law, tax
monies of this state, federal monies passing through the state treasury or any
other state monies may not be distributed to any person or entity, including
any state-funded institution or facility, that operates a drag show
targeting minors.
C. For the purposes of this section,
"Drag show targeting minors" means a show or performance for entertainment
at which a single performer or group of performers dress in clothing and makeup
opposite of the performer's or group of performers' gender at birth to
exaggerate gender signifiers and roles and engage in singing, dancing or a
monologue or skit in order to entertain a target audience of persons under
eighteen years of age. END_STATUTE
Sec. 2. Section 35-197, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:
START_STATUTE35-197. Violations; classification; prohibition on state monies
A. Any officer, agent or
employee of the state who knowingly fails or refuses to comply with any of the
provisions of this chapter is guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor.
B. A person or entity that is
convicted of violating section 35-196.06 may not receive or spend any
state monies for thirty-six months after the conviction. END_STATUTE




House
File
290
-
Introduced


HOUSE
FILE
290


BY
FISHER


A
BILL
FOR


An
Act
relating
to
the
terms
gender
and
sex,
including
a
1


person’s
sex
designation
listed
on
government
documents.
2


BE
IT
ENACTED
BY
THE
GENERAL
ASSEMBLY
OF
THE
STATE
OF
IOWA:
3


TLSB
1097YH
(4)
90


cm/ns




H.F.
290


Section
1.
Section
4.1,
subsection
17,
Code
2023,
is
amended
1


to
read
as
follows:
2


17.
Number
and
gender.
Unless
otherwise
specifically
3


provided
by
law
the


:
4


a.


The
singular
includes
the
plural,
and
the
plural
includes
5


the
singular.
6


b.


Words
of
one
gender
include
the
other
genders.
7


c.
The
term
“gender”
,
or
the
term
“sex”
when
used
in
8


reference
to
gender,
means
the
biological
sex
designation
of


9


male
or
female
on
a
person’s
birth
certificate.
10


Sec.
2.
NEW
SECTION


.
27D.1
Sex
designation
listed
on
11


government
documents.
12


The
state
or
any
other
governmental
body,
as
defined
13


in
section
21.2,
shall
not
list
a
person’s
gender
or
sex
14


designation
on
any
application,
form,
list,
license,
or
other
15


document
that
is
different
from
the
gender
or
sex
designation
16


listed
on
a
person’s
official
birth
certificate.
17


EXPLANATION
18


The
inclusion
of
this
explanation
does
not
constitute
agreement
with
19


the
explanation’s
substance
by
the
members
of
the
general
assembly.
20


Under
current
law,
Code
section
4.1
sets
forth
certain
21


general
rules
for
the
usage
of
terms
throughout
the
Code.
22


This
bill
defines
the
terms
“gender”
and
“sex”,
when
used
in
23


reference
to
gender,
to
mean
the
biological
sex
designation
of
24


male
or
female
on
a
person’s
birth
certificate.
Therefore,
25


when
a
Code
section
refers
to
gender
or
sex
in
reference
to
26


its
inclusion
on
an
application,
license,
or
other
document
27


(for
example,
Code
section
321.182,
relating
to
driver’s
28


licenses),
the
listed
gender
or
sex
must
comply
with
the
bill’s
29


definition.
Current
Code
section
144.23
provides
that
a
new
30


certificate
of
birth
is
issued
upon
receipt
of
proof
of
a
31


change
in
sex
designation.
32


In
addition,
the
bill
specifies
that
the
state
or
any
33


governmental
body
is
not
allowed
to
list
a
person’s
gender
or
34


sex
designation
listed
on
any
application,
form,
list,
license,
35


-1-


LSB
1097YH
(4)
90


cm/ns
1/
2




















H.F.
290


or
other
document
that
is
different
from
the
gender
or
sex
1


designation
listed
on
the
person’s
official
birth
certificate.
2


-2-


LSB
1097YH
(4)
90


cm/ns
2/
2





Senate
File
110
-
Introduced


SENATE
FILE
110


BY
SALMON
,
EVANS
,
ALONS
,


GREEN
,
WESTRICH
,
J.
TAYLOR
,


GUTH
,
DE
WITT
,
and
ROWLEY


A
BILL
FOR


An
Act
relating
to
gender-transition
procedures,
and
including
1


effective
date
provisions.
2


BE
IT
ENACTED
BY
THE
GENERAL
ASSEMBLY
OF
THE
STATE
OF
IOWA:
3


TLSB
1134XS
(5)
90


cm/ns




S.F.
110


Section
1.
NEW
SECTION
.
144H.1
Definitions.
1


As
used
in
this
chapter,
unless
the
context
otherwise
2


requires:
3


1.
“Biological
sex”
means
the
genetic
classification
of
an
4


individual
as
male
or
female,
as
reflected
in
the
organization
5


of
the
body
of
the
individual
for
a
reproductive
role
or
6


capacity,
such
as
through
sex
chromosomes,
naturally
occurring
7


sex
hormones,
and
internal
and
external
genitalia
present
at
8


birth,
without
regard
to
the
subjective
sense
of
identity
of
9


the
individual.
10


2.
a.
“Gender-transition
procedure”
means
any
of
the
11


following:
12


(1)
The
prescription
or
administration
of
puberty-blocking
13


drugs
for
the
purpose
of
changing
the
body
of
an
individual
14


so
that
it
conforms
to
the
subjective
sense
of
identity
of
15


the
individual,
in
the
case
such
identity
is
at
odds
with
the
16


individual’s
biological
sex.
17


(2)
The
prescription
or
administration
of
cross-sex
18


hormones
for
the
purpose
of
changing
the
body
of
an
individual
19


so
that
it
conforms
to
the
subjective
sense
of
identity
of
20


the
individual,
in
the
case
such
identity
is
at
odds
with
the
21


individual’s
biological
sex.
22


(3)
A
surgery
to
change
the
body
of
an
individual
so
that
it
23


conforms
to
the
subjective
sense
of
identity
of
the
individual,
24


in
the
case
such
identity
is
at
odds
with
the
individual’s
25


biological
sex.
26


b.
“Gender-transition
procedure”
does
not
include
an
27


intervention
described
in
paragraph
“a”
that
is
performed
in
any
28


of
the
following
circumstances:
29


(1)
On
an
individual
with
biological
sex
characteristics
30


that
are
inherently
ambiguous,
such
as
those
born
with
31


forty-six
XX
chromosomes
with
virilization,
with
forty-six
XY
32


chromosomes
with
undervirilization,
or
having
both
ovarian
33


and
testicular
tissue
or
an
individual
with
respect
to
whom
34


a
medical
practitioner
has
determined
through
genetic
or
35


-1-


LSB
1134XS
(5)
90


cm/ns
1/
4





S.F.
110


biochemical
testing
that
the
individual
does
not
have
normal
1


sex
chromosome
structure,
sex
steroid
hormone
production,
or
2


sex
steroid
hormone
action,
for
a
biological
male
or
biological
3


female.
4


(2)
For
the
treatment
of
any
infection,
injury,
disease,
or
5


disorder
that
has
been
caused
or
exacerbated
by
the
performance
6


of
an
intervention
described
in
paragraph
“a”
without
regard
to
7


whether
the
intervention
was
performed
in
accordance
with
state
8


or
federal
law
or
whether
the
intervention
is
covered
by
the
9


private
right
of
action
under
section
144H.2.
10


(3)
Using
any
procedure
undertaken
because
the
individual
11


suffers
from
a
physical
disorder,
physical
injury,
or
physical
12


illness
that
would,
as
certified
by
a
medical
practitioner,
13


place
the
individual
in
imminent
danger
of
death
or
impairment
14


of
major
bodily
function
unless
the
procedure
is
performed.
15


3.
“Medical
practitioner”
means
a
person
who
is
licensed,
16


certified,
or
otherwise
authorized
by
the
laws
of
a
state
to
17


administer
health
care
in
the
ordinary
course
of
the
practice
18


of
the
person’s
profession.
19


Sec.
2.
NEW
SECTION


.
144H.2
Private
right
of
action
for
20


gender-transition
procedure
performed
on
minor.
21


1.
A
medical
practitioner
who
performs
a
gender-transition
22


procedure
in
this
state
on
an
individual
who
is
less
than
23


eighteen
years
of
age
shall,
as
described
in
subsection
2,
be
24


liable
to
the
individual
if
injured,
including
any
physical,
25


psychological,
emotional,
or
physiological
harms,
by
such
26


procedure,
related
treatment,
or
subsequent
effects
of
the
27


procedure
or
treatment.
28


2.
An
individual
covered
by
subsection
1,
who
receives
a
29


gender-transition
procedure
from
a
medical
practitioner,
or
30


the
individual’s
representative,
including
a
legal
guardian,
31


on
behalf
of
such
individual,
may,
not
later
than
the
day
32


that
is
thirty
years
after
the
date
on
which
the
individual
33


turns
eighteen
years
of
age,
bring
a
civil
action
against
such
34


medical
practitioner
in
a
court
of
competent
jurisdiction
35


-2-


LSB
1134XS
(5)
90


cm/ns
2/
4





S.F.
110


for
declaratory
or
injunctive
relief,
compensatory
damages,
1


punitive
damages,
and
attorney
fees
and
costs.
2


Sec.
3.
NEW
SECTION


.
144H.3
Performance
not
required.
3


Notwithstanding
any
other
provision
of
law
to
the
contrary,
4


no
provision
of
state
law
shall
require,
or
be
construed
to
5


require,
a
medical
practitioner
to
perform
a
gender-transition
6


procedure.
7


Sec.
4.
NEW
SECTION
.
144H.4
Prohibition
on
funding.
8


Notwithstanding
any
other
provision
of
law
to
the
contrary,
9


any
medical
practitioner
that
performs
any
gender-transition
10


procedure
on
an
individual
in
this
state
shall
be
ineligible
11


to
receive
any
funding
from
the
department
of
health
and
human
12


services.
13


Sec.
5.
EFFECTIVE
DATE.
This
Act,
being
deemed
of
immediate
14


importance,
takes
effect
upon
enactment.
15


EXPLANATION
16


The
inclusion
of
this
explanation
does
not
constitute
agreement
with
17


the
explanation’s
substance
by
the
members
of
the
general
assembly.
18


This
bill
creates
a
private
right
of
action
for
19


gender-transition
procedures
performed
on
a
minor.
The
20


bill
provides
that
a
medical
practitioner
who
performs
a
21


gender-transition
procedure
in
this
state
on
an
individual
who
22


is
less
than
18
years
of
age
shall
be
liable
to
the
individual
23


if
injured,
including
any
physical,
psychological,
emotional,
24


or
physiological
harms,
by
such
procedure,
related
treatment,
25


or
subsequent
effects
of
the
procedure
or
treatment.
An
26


individual
who
receives
a
gender-transition
procedure
from
27


a
medical
practitioner,
or
the
individual’s
representative,
28


has
30
years
after
the
date
the
individual
turned
18
years
of
29


age
to
bring
a
civil
action
against
such
medical
practitioner
30


for
declaratory
or
injunctive
relief,
compensatory
damages,
31


punitive
damages,
and
attorney
fees
and
costs.
32


The
bill
provides
that
no
state
law
shall
require
a
medical
33


practitioner
to
perform
a
gender-transition
procedure
and
that
34


any
medical
practitioner
that
performs
a
gender-transition
35


-3-


LSB
1134XS
(5)
90


cm/ns
3/
4






S.F.
110


procedure
on
an
individual
in
this
state
shall
be
ineligible
1


to
receive
any
funding
from
the
department
of
health
and
human
2


services.
3


The
bill
takes
effect
upon
enactment.
4


-4-


LSB
1134XS
(5)
90


cm/ns
4/
4








2023-2024 Bill 3197 Text of Previous Version (Dec. 08, 2022) - South Carolina Legislature Online
 

South Carolina General Assembly125th Session, 2023-2024Bill 3197Indicates Matter StrickenIndicates New Matter(Text matches printed bills. Document has been reformatted to meet World Wide Web specifications.)








A bill

to amend the South Carolina Code of Laws by adding chapter 23 to title 63 so as to provide that parents have fundamental rights regarding the upbringing, education, and care of their children; to define necessary terms; to limit the ability of the government to infringe on parental rights; to identify certain fundamental rights of parents; to require that school districts create parental involvement policies; to prohibit care providers from soliciting or providing health care services to children without written parental consent; to provide that the chapter's provisions supersede state of emergency declarations; to create a cause of action for violations of this chapter; and by amending Section 63-5-340, relating to the age at which a minor may consent to health services, so as to raise the age to eighteen.

Be it enacted by the General Assembly of the State of South Carolina:

SECTION 1.Title 63 of the S.C. Code is amended by adding:

CHAPTER 23

Parental Bill of Rights

Section 63-23-110.The General Assembly finds that:
(1) parents have a fundamental right to direct the upbringing, education, and care of their children;
(2) important information relating to a child should not be withheld, either inadvertently or purposefully, from his or her parent, including information relating to the child's health, well being, and education, while the child is in the custody of the school district; and
(3) it is necessary to establish a consistent mechanism for parents to be notified of information relating to the health and well being of their children.

Section 63-23-120.For purposes of this chapter:
(1) "Child" means a person under the age of eighteen.
(2) "Health care provider" means a physician, advanced practice registered nurse, or physician assistant licensed to practice in this State pursuant to Articles 1 and 7, Chapter 47, Title 40 and Article 1, Chapter 33, Title 40, respectively.
(3) "Instructional materials" means any textbooks or other instructional material adopted by the State Board of Education or a local school district or school, and may include other materials used in the classroom, including workbooks and worksheets, handouts, software, applications, and any digital media made available to students.
(4) "Parent" means a biological parent, adoptive parent, legal guardian, or other person with legal custody of a child.

Section 63-23-130.The State, political subdivisions of the State, public school districts, other governmental entities, and other institutions shall not infringe on the fundamental rights of a parent to direct the upbringing, education, health care, and mental health care of his or her child without demonstrating that the action is reasonable and necessary to achieve a compelling state interest as applied to the parent and child; narrowly tailored to achieve the compelling state interest; and not otherwise served by a less restrictive means.

Section 63-23-140.(A) All parental rights are reserved to the parent of a child in this State without obstruction or interference from the State, political subdivisions of the State, public school districts, other governmental entities, or other institutions, including:
(1) the right to direct the education and care of his or her child;
(2) the right to direct the upbringing and the moral or religious training of his or her child;
(3) the right to apply to enroll his or her child in a public school or, as an alternative to public education, a private school, including a religious school, a home education program, or other available options, as authorized by law;
(4) the right to access and review all school records relating to his or her child;
(5) the right to make physical and mental health care decisions for his or her child, unless otherwise prohibited by court order;
(6) the right to access and review all medical records of his or her child, unless prohibited by court order or if the parent is the subject of an investigation of a crime committed against the child and a law enforcement agency or official requests that the information not be released;
(7) the right to consent in writing before a biometric scan of his or her child is made, shared, or stored;
(8) the right to consent in writing before any record of his or her child's blood or deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) is created, stored, or shared, except as authorized pursuant to a court order;
(9) the right to consent in writing before the State, a political subdivision of the State, or a public school district or public school makes a video or voice recording of his or her child unless the recording is made during or as part of a court proceeding or is made as part of a forensic interview in a criminal or Department of Social Services investigation or is to be used solely for:
(a) security or surveillance of buildings or grounds; or
(b) a photo identification card; and
(10) the right to be notified promptly if an employee of the State, a political subdivision of the State, a public school district or public school, another governmental entity, or another institution suspects that abuse, neglect, or a criminal offense has been committed against his or her child, unless the incident has first been reported to law enforcement or the Department of Social Services and notifying the parent would impede the investigation.
(B) This section does not:
(1) authorize a parent of a child in this State to engage in conduct that constitutes child abuse or neglect as defined in Section 63-7-20 in violation of state law;
(2) condone, authorize, approve, or apply to a parental action or decision that would end life; or
(3) prohibit a court of competent jurisdiction from issuing an order that is otherwise permitted by law.
(C) An employee of the State, a political subdivision of the State, a public school district, or another governmental entity shall not encourage or coerce, or attempt to encourage or coerce, a child to withhold information from his or her parent, nor shall any such employee withhold from a child's parent information that is relevant to the physical, emotional, or mental health of the child.
(D) A parent of a child in this State has inalienable rights that are more comprehensive than those listed in this chapter unless the rights have been legally waived or terminated. This chapter does not prescribe all rights to a parent of a child in this State. Unless required by law, the rights of a parent of a child in this State may not be limited or denied.

Section 63-23-150.(A) In addition to the requirements of Chapter 28, Title 59, each district school board shall, in consultation with parents, teachers, and administrators, develop and adopt a policy to promote parental involvement in the public school system. The policy must include:
(1) a plan for parental participation in schools to improve parent and teacher cooperation in such areas as homework, school attendance, and discipline;
(2) a procedure for a parent to learn about his or her child's course of study, including the source of any supplemental educational materials;
(3) procedures for a parent to object to a specific educational activity, instructional materials and other materials used in the classroom and for a parent to withdraw the child from the specific activity, class, or program where the objectional material or activity is used. Such objections may be based on beliefs regarding morality, sex, and religion or the belief that such materials are harmful;
(4) procedures for a parent to withdraw his or her child from any portion of the school district's comprehensive health education program required pursuant to Chapter 32, Title 59 that relates to sex education or instruction in acquired immune deficiency syndrome education or any instruction regarding sexuality if the parent provides a written objection to his or her child's participation. The procedures must provide for a parent to be notified at least seven days in advance of such course content so that he or she may withdraw his or her child from those portions of the course. Instruction regarding sexuality includes curriculum that has the goal or purpose of studying, exploring, or informing students about gender roles or stereotypes, gender identity, gender expression, sexual orientation, or romantic or sexual relationships;
(5) procedures for a parent to learn about the nature and purpose of clubs and activities offered at his or her child's school, including those that are extracurricular or part of the school curriculum, and for the parent to withdraw his or her child from any club or activity that the parent objects to the child's participation;
(6) procedures for a parent to learn about parental rights and responsibilities under general law, including all of the following:
(a) the right to receive prior notice and to opt his or her child out of any portion of the school district's comprehensive health education required pursuant to Chapter 32, Title 59 that relates to sex education instruction in acquired immune deficiency syndrome education or any instruction regarding sexuality;
(b) the right to opt his or her child out of any specific activity, class, or program where an objectionable activity or material is used;
(c) a plan to disseminate information about school choice options, including open enrollment;
(d) in accordance with Section 44-29-180, the right of a parent to exempt his or her child from immunizations;
(e) the right of a parent to review statewide, standardized assessment results;
(f) the right of a parent to enroll his or her child in gifted or special education programs;
(g) the right of a parent to inspect school district instructional materials;
(h) the right of a parent to access information relating to the school district's policies for promotion or retention, including high school graduation requirements;
(i) the right of a parent to receive a school report card and be informed of his or her child's attendance requirements;
(j) the right of a parent to access information relating to the state public education system, state standards, report card requirements, attendance requirements, and instructional material requirements;
(k) the right of a parent to participate in parent teacher associations and organizations that are sanctioned by a district school board or the State Department of Education;
(l) the right of a parent to opt out of any district level data collection relating to his or her child not required by law; and
(m) the right to be excused from school attendance for religious purposes.
(B) A district school board may provide the information required in this section electronically or post such information on its website.
(C) A parent may request, in writing, from the school district superintendent the information required under this section. Within ten days, the school district superintendent must provide the information to the parent. If the school district superintendent denies a parent's request for information or does not respond to the parent's request within ten days, the parent may appeal the denial to the district school board. The district school board must place a parent's appeal on the agenda for its next public meeting. If it is too late for a parent's appeal to appear on the next agenda, the appeal must be included on the agenda for the subsequent meeting.

Section 63-23-160.(A) Except as otherwise provided by court order, a health care provider may not provide or solicit or arrange to provide health care services, perform a physical or psychological examination, or prescribe medicinal drugs or biologics to a child without first obtaining written parental consent.
(B) Except as otherwise provided by court order, a health care provider shall not allow a medical procedure to be performed on a child in its facility without first obtaining written parental consent.
(C) This section does not apply to an abortion, which is governed by Chapter 41, Title 44.
(D) This section does not apply when a medical emergency exists that requires a person to perform a medical service to prevent imminent and irreparable serious injury to or save the life of a child.
(E) A health care practitioner or other person who violates this section is:
(1) subject to disciplinary action by the relevant professional licensing board; and
(2) guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of one thousand dollars, not more than thirty days in jail, or both.

Section 63-23-170.The provisions of this chapter apply notwithstanding any conflicting temporary provision in a declaration of a state of emergency by the Governor or a health care state of emergency declared by the Department of Health and Environmental Control.

Section 63-23-180.(A) Any parent may raise a violation of this chapter in state or federal court or before an administrative tribunal of appropriate jurisdiction as a claim or a defense.
(B) Any parent claiming violation of any provisions of this chapter may bring an action for injunctive relief and damages against the state or any of its political subdivisions, including, without limitation, any school board, school district, or school administrative unit, any other governmental entity, the parent claims has violated this chapter, and if the court finds in favor of the parent, it may award to the parent his or her reasonable attorneys' fees and court costs, including attorneys' fees and court costs on appeal to the South Carolina Supreme Court.

SECTION 2.Section 63-5-340 of the S.C. Code is amended to read:

Section 63-5-340.Any minor who has reached the age of sixteen eighteen years may consent to any health services from a person authorized by law to render the particular health service for himself and the consent of no other person shall be necessary unless such involves an operation which shall be performed only if such is essential to the health or life of such child in the opinion of the performing physician and a consultant physician if one is available.

SECTION 3.This act takes effect upon approval by the Governor.
----XX----
This web page was last updated on December 08, 2022 at 05:30 PM




 
 
PREFILED JAN 06 2023



REFERENCE TITLE: adult cabaret
  performances; prohibited locations




 
 
 
 
State of
  Arizona
Senate
Fifty-sixth
  Legislature
First Regular
  Session
2023
 
 
 




SB 1028




 




Introduced by 
Senator Kern
 



 
 
 
 
 
 
 
An Act
 
amending
title 13, chapter 14, Arizona Revised Statutes, by adding section 13-1422.01;
relating to sexual offenses.
 
 
(TEXT OF BILL BEGINS ON NEXT PAGE)
 




Be it enacted by the Legislature of the State of Arizona:
Section 1. Title 13, chapter 14, Arizona
Revised Statutes, is amended by adding section 13-1422.01, to read:
START_STATUTE13-1422.01. Adult cabaret performances; location; classification; definitions
A. A person may not engage in an
adult cabaret performance in either of the following locations:
1. On public property.
2. In a location where the adult
cabaret performance could be viewed by a minor.
B. This section does not prohibit a
county or municipality from enacting and enforcing ordinances that regulate the
location of adult cabaret performances in a manner that is at least as
restrictive as this section. 
C. A violation of this section is a
class 1 misdemeanor, except that a second or subsequent violation is a class 6
felony.
D. For the purposes of this section:
1. "Adult cabaret" has the
same meaning prescribed in section 13-1422.
2. "Adult cabaret
performance" means a performance in a location other than an adult cabaret
that features topless dancers, go-go dancers, exotic dancers, strippers,
drag performers, drag shows, male or female impersonators who provide
entertainment that appeals to a prurient interest or other similar
entertainers, regardless of whether or not the performance is for
consideration. END_STATUTE




 
88R4761 PRL-D


 


 

		By: Hall
S.B. No. 393




 


 



 		
			

A BILL TO BE ENTITLED




 
			

AN ACT




 
			
relating to parental rights in public education and prohibiting 



 
			
instruction regarding sexual orientation or gender identity for 



 
			
public school students; authorizing a civil remedy.



 
			
       BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF TEXAS:



 
			
       SECTION 1.  The heading to Section 26.011, Education Code, 



 
			
is amended to read as follows:



 
			
       Sec. 26.011.  COMPLAINTS; CIVIL REMEDY.



 
			
       SECTION 2.  Section 26.011, Education Code, is amended by 



 
			
adding Subsections (c), (d), and (e) to read as follows:



 
			
       (c)  A grievance procedure adopted under this section must 



 
			
require that, not later than the 30th day after receipt of a 



 
			
complaint described by Subsection (a), the school district:



 
			
             (1)  resolve the issue that gave rise to the complaint; 



 
			
or



 
			
             (2)  provide to the parent who submitted the complaint 



 
			
a written explanation of the district's reason for not resolving 



 
			
the issue.



 
			
       (d)  If a school district does not resolve an issue described 



 
			
by Subsection (c)(1), the parent may bring a civil action against 



 
			
the district to obtain appropriate injunctive and declaratory 



 
			
relief. A court may award damages and shall award reasonable 



 
			
attorney's fees and court costs to a prevailing parent. Remedies 



 
			
provided by this subsection are not exclusive.



 
			
       (e)  The board of trustees of each school district shall 



 
			
adopt a policy for notifying parents of students enrolled in the 



 
			
district regarding the grievance procedure adopted by the district 



 
			
under this section.



 
			
       SECTION 3.  Chapter 26, Education Code, is amended by adding 



 
			
Sections 26.0083, 26.0084, and 26.016 to read as follows:



 
			
       Sec. 26.0083.  RIGHT TO INFORMATION REGARDING MENTAL, 



 
			
EMOTIONAL, AND PHYSICAL HEALTH AND HEALTH-RELATED SERVICES.  (a)  



 
			
Each school district shall adopt a procedure for notifying the 



 
			
parent of a student enrolled in the district regarding any change 



 
			
in:



 
			
             (1)  services provided to or monitoring of the student 



 
			
related to the student's mental, emotional, or physical health or 



 
			
well-being; or



 
			
             (2)  the district's ability to provide a safe and 



 
			
supportive learning environment for the student.



 
			
       (b)  A procedure adopted under Subsection (a) must reinforce 



 
			
the fundamental right of a parent to make decisions regarding the 



 
			
upbringing and education of the parent's child by requiring school 



 
			
district personnel to:



 
			
             (1)  encourage a student to discuss issues relating to 



 
			
the student's well-being with the student's parent; or



 
			
             (2)  facilitate a discussion described under 



 
			
Subdivision (1).



 
			
       (c)  A school district may not adopt a procedure or a student 



 
			
support form, including a student well-being questionnaire or 



 
			
health screening form, that:



 
			
             (1)  prohibits a district employee from notifying the 



 
			
parent of a student regarding:



 
			
                   (A)  information about the student's mental, 



 
			
emotional, or physical health or well-being; or



 
			
                   (B)  a change in services provided to or 



 
			
monitoring of the student related to the student's mental, 



 
			
emotional, or physical health or well-being; or



 
			
             (2)  encourages or has the effect of encouraging a 



 
			
student to withhold from the student's parent information described 



 
			
by Subdivision (1)(A).



 
			
       (d)  A school district employee may not discourage or 



 
			
prohibit parental knowledge of or involvement in critical decisions 



 
			
affecting a student's mental, emotional, or physical health or 



 
			
well-being.



 
			
       (e)  Before the first instructional day of each school year, 



 
			
a school district shall provide to the parent of each student 



 
			
enrolled in the district written notice of each health-related 



 
			
service offered at the district campus the student attends.  The 



 
			
notice must include a statement of the parent's right to withhold 



 
			
consent for or decline a health-related service.  A parent's 



 
			
consent to a health-related service does not waive a requirement of 



 
			
Subsection (a), (c), or (d).



 
			
       (f)  Before administering a student support form to a 



 
			
student, a school district must provide a copy of the form to the 



 
			
student's parent and obtain the parent's consent to administer the 



 
			
form.



 
			
       (g)  Not later than June 30, 2024, the agency, the State 



 
			
Board of Education, and the State Board for Educator Certification, 



 
			
as appropriate, shall review and revise as necessary the following 



 
			
to ensure compliance with this section:



 
			
             (1)  school counseling frameworks and standards;



 
			
             (2)  educator practices and professional conduct 



 
			
principles; and



 
			
             (3)  any other student services personnel guidelines, 



 
			
standards, or frameworks.



 
			
       (h)  Subsection (g) and this subsection expire September 1, 



 
			
2025.



 
			
       Sec. 26.0084.  RIGHT TO INFORMATION REGARDING STUDENT'S 



 
			
PERCEPTION OF BIOLOGICAL SEX.  A school district employee or 



 
			
independent contractor of a district, including a third-party 



 
			
instructor, guest speaker, or subcontractor, may not withhold from 



 
			
a student's parent information related to the student's perception 



 
			
of the student's biological sex if that perception is inconsistent 



 
			
with the student's biological sex as determined by the student's sex 



 
			
organs, chromosomes, and endogenous hormone profiles.



 
			
       Sec. 26.016.  CONSENT REQUIRED FOR PARTICIPATION IN CERTAIN 



 
			
STUDENT CLUBS.  (a)  In this section, "student club" means any 



 
			
student organization  sponsored or sanctioned by a school district.



 
			
       (b)  A school district shall require written parental 



 
			
consent as a condition of a student's participation in a student 



 
			
club that promotes themes of sexuality, gender, or gender identity.



 
			
       (c)  A school district shall seek parental consent under this 



 
			
section by providing a written form to a parent that includes the 



 
			
foundational documents of the student club described by Subsection 



 
			
(b) in which the student wishes to participate, including:



 
			
             (1)  the name of the club;



 
			
             (2)  the mission statement or purpose of the club; and



 
			
             (3)  any additional information determined appropriate 



 
			
by the school district.



 
			
       SECTION 4.  Subchapter A, Chapter 28, Education Code, is 



 
			
amended by adding Section 28.0043 to read as follows:



 
			
       Sec. 28.0043.  RESTRICTION ON INSTRUCTION REGARDING SEXUAL 



 
			
ORIENTATION AND GENDER IDENTITY.  A school district, 



 
			
open-enrollment charter school, or district or charter school 



 
			
employee may not provide or allow a third party to provide 



 
			
instruction regarding sexual orientation or gender identity to 



 
			
students enrolled in the district or school.



 
			
       SECTION 5.  Section 12.104(b), Education Code, as amended by 



 
			
Chapters 542 (S.B. 168), 887 (S.B. 1697), 915 (H.B. 3607), 974 (S.B. 



 
			
2081), and 1046 (S.B. 1365), Acts of the 87th Legislature, Regular 



 
			
Session, 2021, is reenacted and amended to read as follows:



 
			
       (b)  An open-enrollment charter school is subject to:



 
			
             (1)  a provision of this title establishing a criminal 



 
			
offense;



 
			
             (2)  the provisions in Chapter 554, Government Code; 



 
			
and



 
			
             (3)  a prohibition, restriction, or requirement, as 



 
			
applicable, imposed by this title or a rule adopted under this 



 
			
title, relating to:



 
			
                   (A)  the Public Education Information Management 



 
			
System (PEIMS) to the extent necessary to monitor compliance with 



 
			
this subchapter as determined by the commissioner;



 
			
                   (B)  criminal history records under Subchapter C, 



 
			
Chapter 22;



 
			
                   (C)  reading instruments and accelerated reading 



 
			
instruction programs under Section 28.006;



 
			
                   (D)  accelerated instruction under Section 



 
			
28.0211;



 
			
                   (E)  high school graduation requirements under 



 
			
Section 28.025;



 
			
                   (F)  special education programs under Subchapter 



 
			
A, Chapter 29;



 
			
                   (G)  bilingual education under Subchapter B, 



 
			
Chapter 29;



 
			
                   (H)  prekindergarten programs under Subchapter E 



 
			
or E-1, Chapter 29, except class size limits for prekindergarten 



 
			
classes imposed under Section 25.112, which do not apply;



 
			
                   (I)  extracurricular activities under Section 



 
			
33.081;



 
			
                   (J)  discipline management practices or behavior 



 
			
management techniques under Section 37.0021;



 
			
                   (K)  health and safety under Chapter 38;



 
			
                   (L)  the provisions of Subchapter A, Chapter 39;



 
			
                   (M)  public school accountability and special 



 
			
investigations under Subchapters A, B, C, D, F, G, and J, Chapter 



 
			
39, and Chapter 39A;



 
			
                   (N)  the requirement under Section 21.006 to 



 
			
report an educator's misconduct;



 
			
                   (O)  intensive programs of instruction under 



 
			
Section 28.0213;



 
			
                   (P)  the right of a school employee to report a 



 
			
crime, as provided by Section 37.148;



 
			
                   (Q)  bullying prevention policies and procedures 



 
			
under Section 37.0832;



 
			
                   (R)  the right of a school under Section 37.0052 



 
			
to place a student who has engaged in certain bullying behavior in a 



 
			
disciplinary alternative education program or to expel the student;



 
			
                   (S)  the right under Section 37.0151 to report to 



 
			
local law enforcement certain conduct constituting assault or 



 
			
harassment;



 
			
                   (T)  a parent's right to information regarding the 



 
			
provision of assistance for learning difficulties to the parent's 



 
			
child as provided by Sections 26.004(b)(11) and 26.0081(c) and (d);



 
			
                   (U)  establishment of residency under Section 



 
			
25.001;



 
			
                   (V)  school safety requirements under Sections 



 
			
37.108, 37.1081, 37.1082, 37.109, 37.113, 37.114, 37.1141, 37.115, 



 
			
37.207, and 37.2071;



 
			
                   (W)  the early childhood literacy and mathematics 



 
			
proficiency plans under Section 11.185;



 
			
                   (X)  the college, career, and military readiness 



 
			
plans under Section 11.186; [and]



 
			
                   (Y) [(X)]  parental options to retain a student 



 
			
under Section 28.02124; and



 
			
                   (Z)  parental rights to:



 
			
                         (i)  information regarding a student's 



 
			
mental, emotional, and physical health and health-related services 



 
			
offered by the school as provided by Section 26.0083;



 
			
                         (ii)  information regarding a student's 



 
			
perception of the student's biological sex as provided by Section 



 
			
26.0084; and



 
			
                         (iii)  consent to a student's participation 



 
			
in a student club that promotes themes of sexuality, gender, or 



 
			
gender identity as provided by Section 26.016.



 
			
       SECTION 6.  This Act applies beginning with the 2023-2024 



 
			
school year.



 
			
       SECTION 7.  To the extent of any conflict, this Act prevails 



 
			
over another Act of the 88th Legislature, Regular Session, 2023, 



 
			
relating to nonsubstantive additions to and corrections in enacted 



 
			
codes.



 
			
       SECTION 8.  This Act takes effect immediately if it receives 



 
			
a vote of two-thirds of all the members elected to each house, as 



 
			
provided by Section 39, Article III, Texas Constitution.  If this 



 
			
Act does not receive the vote necessary for immediate effect, this 



 
			
Act takes effect September 1, 2023.




HB 417-FN - AS INTRODUCED  2023 SESSION	23-0257	06/05 HOUSE BILL	417-FN AN ACT	relative to the definition of child abuse. SPONSORS:	Rep. Testerman, Merr. 3 COMMITTEE:	Children and Family Law ----------------------------------------------------------------- ANALYSIS 	This bill adds sexual reassignment to the definition of an abused child in RSA 169-C, the child protection act. - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -  Explanation:	Matter added to current law appears in bold italics.		Matter removed from current law appears [in brackets and struckthrough.]		Matter which is either (a) all new or (b) repealed and reenacted appears in regular type.	23-0257	06/05 STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE In the Year of Our Lord Two Thousand Twenty Three AN ACT	relative to the definition of child abuse. Be it Enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives in General Court convened:  1  Definition of Abused Child; Sexual Reassignment Added.  Amend RSA 169-C:3, II(f) to read as follows:			(f)  Subjected to an act prohibited by RSA 632-A:10-d; or (g)  Subjected to drug treatments or surgery in an attempt to alter the sex of the child assigned at birth, except in rare cases of ambiguous genitalia.  For purposes of this subparagraph, ambiguous genitalia refers to a medical condition in which a child's gender at birth is in question because the genitals do not appear clearly male or female. 2  Effective Date.  This act shall take effect 60 days after its passage. 											LBA											23-0257											1/5/23 HB 417-FN- FISCAL NOTEAS INTRODUCED AN ACT	relative to the definition of child abuse. FISCAL IMPACT:      [ X ] State              [ X ] County               [    ] Local              [    ] None

  

 Estimated Increase / (Decrease)

STATE:FY 2023FY 2024FY 2025FY 2026

   Appropriation$0$0$0$0

   Revenue$0$0$0$0

   Expenditures$0Indeterminable IncreaseIndeterminable IncreaseIndeterminable Increase

Funding Source:  [ X ] General            [    ] Education            [    ] Highway           [    ] Other 

     

COUNTY:    

   Revenue$0$0$0$0

   Expenditures$0Indeterminable IncreaseIndeterminable IncreaseIndeterminable Increase

     

METHODOLOGY:This bill adds sexual reassignment, except in cases of ambiguous genitalia, to the list of conduct that constitutes abuse under RSA 169-C, the Child Protection Act.  The Department of Health and Human Services does not have any information to assess the potential fiscal impact, so the impact on child abuse cases and any related litigation costs is indeterminable.  This bill may have an impact on the New Hampshire judicial and correctional systems.  There is no method to determine how many additional charges would be brought as a result of the bill to determine the impact on expenditures.  However, the entities impacted have provided the potential costs associated with these penalties below. 

Judicial BranchFY 2023FY 2024               through 12/31/23FY 2024(Starting 1/1/24 with repeal of Felonies First)

Violation and Misdemeanor Level Offense$119$122$122

Complex Felony Case$3,195$3,244$3,366

Routine Criminal Case$644$657$779

AppealsVariesVariesVaries

Judicial CouncilFY 2023FY 2024

Public Defender Program Has contract with State to provide services.Has contract with State to provide services.

Contract Attorney - Felony$825/Case$105 administrative fee$200 incarceration fee (If applicable)$825/Case$105 administrative fee$200 incarceration fee (If applicable)

Contract Attorney – Misdemeanor$300/Case$70 administrative fee$100 incarceration fee (If applicable)$300/Case$70 administrative fee$100 incarceration fee (If applicable)

Contract Attorney - Major Crimes (aggravated felonious sexual assault, felonious sexual assault and first degree assault)$2,490/Case$140 administrative fee$200 incarceration fee(If applicable)$2,490/Case$140 administrative fee$200 incarceration fee(If applicable)

Assigned Counsel - Felony.Homicide including capital cases. Travel time to court does not count toward the cap.$125/Hour up to $20,000$125/Hour up to $20,000

Assigned Counsel - Felony.       Travel time to court does not count toward the cap.$90/Hour up to $5,500$90/Hour up to $5,500

Assigned Counsel- Misdemeanor. Travel time to court does not count toward the cap.$90/Hour up to $2,000$90/Hour up to $2,000

Assigned Counsel - Supreme Court Appeal$125/Hour up to $10,000$125/Hour up to $10,000

It should be noted that a person needs to be found indigent and have the potential of being incarcerated to be eligible for indigent defense services. Historically, approximately 85% of the indigent defense caseload has been handled by the public defender program, with the remaining cases going to contract attorneys (14%) or assigned counsel (1%). Beginning in March of 2021, the public defender program has had to close intake of new cases due to excessive caseloads. Due to these closures, the contract and assigned counsel program have had to absorb significantly more cases. The system is experiencing significant delays in appointing counsel and the costs of representation have increased due to travel time and multiple appointments.

Department of CorrectionsFY 2023FY 2024

FY 2022 Average Cost of Incarcerating an Individual$64,223$64,223

FY 2022 Annual Marginal Cost of a General Population Inmate$6,123$6,123

FY 2022 Average Cost of Supervising an Individual on Parole/Probation$688$688

The Department notes any increase in the incarcerated population will have a direct impact on overtime costs given the Department’s history of challenges associated with recruitment. In addition, the NH State Prison for Men has a degrading infrastructure which will only be exacerbated if an increase in the incarcerated population were to occur.

NH Association of CountiesFY 2023FY 2024

County Prosecution CostsIndeterminableIndeterminable

Estimated Average Daily Cost of Incarcerating an Individual$105 to $125$105 to $125

  Many offenses are prosecuted by local and county prosecutors.  When the Department of Justice has investigative and prosecutorial responsibility or is involved in an appeal, the Department may be able to absorb the cost within its existing budget.  However, if the Department needs to prosecute significantly more cases or handle more appeals, then costs will increase by an indeterminable amount.   AGENCIES CONTACTED:Department of Health and Human Services, Judicial Branch, Departments of Corrections and Justice, Judicial Council, and New Hampshire Association of Counties  


103RD GENERAL ASSEMBLY
State of Illinois
2023 and 2024
SB1659 Introduced 2/8/2023, by Sen. Andrew S. Chesney SYNOPSIS AS INTRODUCED:

105 ILCS 5/10-20.85 new105 ILCS 5/34-18.82 new
 Amends the School Code. Provides that school districts may regulate and restrict access to public restrooms, locker rooms, dressing rooms, and other similar places on the basis of biological sex and may also adopt a policy that provides for gender neutral or alternative facilities for students, staff, and members of the public, as the school district deems appropriate. Provides that school districts are not required to: (1) adopt a policy that restricts or regulates access to public restrooms, locker rooms, dressing rooms, and other similar places on the basis of biological sex; (2) adopt a policy that includes the facilitation of gender neutral or alternative facilities for students, staff, and members of the public; (3) limit access by a minor accompanied by an adult guardian of the opposite sex into a specified facility appropriate for the adult guardian; (4) prohibit a person with disabilities from using a specified facility appropriate to the biological sex of either the person with disabilities or of an adult caretaker providing assistance; (5) prohibit access to these facilities by custodial staff, school staff, or other persons in an emergency situation; or (6) alter their current policies on access to public restrooms, locker rooms, dressing rooms, and other similar places.

LRB103 27389 RJT 53761 b
  A BILL FOR 
SB1659LRB103 27389 RJT 53761 b

1 AN ACT concerning education.

2 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Illinois,
3represented in the General Assembly:


4 Section 5. The School Code is amended by adding Sections 510-20.85 and 34-18.82 as follows:
6 (105 ILCS 5/10-20.85 new)7 Sec. 10-20.85. School restroom access.8 (a) In this Section, "biological sex" means the physical 9condition of being male or female, as determined by a person's 10chromosomes, assigned at birth.11 (b) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a school 12district may regulate and restrict access to public restrooms, 13locker rooms, dressing rooms, and other similar places on the 14basis of biological sex and may adopt a policy that provides 15for gender neutral or alternative facilities for students, 16staff, and members of the public, as the school district deems 17appropriate. 18 (c) Nothing in this Section shall be construed to in any 19way require a school district to: 20  (1) adopt a policy that restricts or regulates access 21 to public restrooms, locker rooms, dressing rooms, and 22 other similar places on the basis of biological sex;23  (2) adopt a policy that includes the facilitation of   SB1659- 2 -LRB103 27389 RJT 53761 b
1 gender neutral or alternative facilities for students, 2 staff, and members of the public;3  (3) limit access by a minor accompanied by an adult 4 guardian of the opposite sex into a specified facility 5 appropriate for the adult guardian;6  (4) prohibit a person with disabilities from using a 7 specified facility appropriate to the biological sex of 8 either the disabled person or of an adult caretaker 9 providing assistance;10  (5) prohibit access to these facilities by custodial 11 staff, school staff, or other persons in an emergency 12 situation; or13  (6) alter its current policies on access to public 14 restrooms, locker rooms, dressing rooms, and other similar 15 places. 
16 (105 ILCS 5/34-18.82 new)17 Sec. 34-18.82. School restroom access.18 (a) In this Section, "biological sex" means the physical 19condition of being male or female, as determined by a person's 20chromosomes, assigned at birth.21 (b) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the school 22district may regulate and restrict access to public restrooms, 23locker rooms, dressing rooms, and other similar places on the 24basis of biological sex and may adopt a policy that provides 25for gender neutral or alternative facilities for students,   SB1659- 3 -LRB103 27389 RJT 53761 b
1staff, and members of the public, as the school district deems 2appropriate. 3 (c) Nothing in this Section shall be construed to in any 4way require the school district to: 5  (1) adopt a policy that restricts or regulates access 6 to public restrooms, locker rooms, dressing rooms, and 7 other similar places on the basis of biological sex;8  (2) adopt a policy that includes the facilitation of 9 gender neutral or alternative facilities for students, 10 staff, and members of the public;11  (3) limit access by a minor accompanied by an adult 12 guardian of the opposite sex into a specified facility 13 appropriate for the adult guardian;14  (4) prohibit a person with disabilities from using a 15 specified facility appropriate to the biological sex of 16 either the disabled person or of an adult caretaker 17 providing assistance;18  (5) prohibit access to these facilities by custodial 19 staff, school staff, or other persons in an emergency 20 situation; or21  (6) alter its current policies on access to public 22 restrooms, locker rooms, dressing rooms, and other similar 23 places. 







2023-2024 Bill 274 Text of Previous Version (Dec. 07, 2022) - South Carolina Legislature Online
 

South Carolina General Assembly125th Session, 2023-2024Bill 274Indicates Matter StrickenIndicates New Matter(Text matches printed bills. Document has been reformatted to meet World Wide Web specifications.)








A bill

to amend the South Carolina Code of Laws by adding Section 40-47-300 so as to provide definitions; by adding Section 40-47-310 so as to provide that a person younger than twenty-one years of age may not undergo gender transition procedures; by adding Section 40-47-320 so as to provide that a person younger than twenty-one years of age may receive appropriate medical services otherwise related to gender transition procedures under limited circumstances; by adding Section 40-47-330 so as to provide prerequisites for a person older than twenty-one years of age to undergo gender transition procedures; by adding Section 40-47-340 so as to provide that no public funds may be used to pay for gender transition procedures; and by adding Section 59-32-35 so as to provide that gender identity disorders may be taught as part of a comprehensive health education program, to provide that students with gender identity disorders must be encouraged seek mental health treatment for the disorder and must not be encouraged to seek gender transition procedures, and to provide that school personnel must notify parents when they learn that a student suffers from a gender identity disorder.

Be it enacted by the General Assembly of the State of South Carolina:

SECTION 1.Chapter 47, Title 40 of the S.C. Code is amended by adding:

Article 3

Gender Reassignment Procedures

Section 40-47-300.For the purposes of this article:
(1) "Biological sex" means the biological indication of male and female in the context of reproductive potential or capacity, such as sex chromosomes, naturally occurring sex hormones, gonads, and nonambiguous internal and external genitalia present at birth, without regard to an individual's psychological, chosen, or subjective experience of gender.
(2) "Cross-sex hormones" means testosterone or other androgens given to biological females in amounts that are larger or more potent than would normally occur naturally in healthy biological sex females; and estrogen given to biological males in amounts that are larger or more potent than would normally occur naturally in healthy biological sex males;
(3) "Gender" means the psychological, behavioral, social, and cultural aspects of being male or female.
(4) "Gender reassignment surgery" means any medical or surgical service that seeks to surgically alter or remove healthy physical or anatomical characteristics or features that are typical for the individual's biological sex, in order to instill or create physiological or anatomical characteristics that resemble a sex different from the individual's biological sex, including without limitation, genital or nongenital gender reassignment surgery performed for the purpose of assisting an individual with a gender transition.
(5) "Gender transition" means the process in which a person goes from identifying with and living as a gender that corresponds to his or her biological sex to identifying with and living as a gender different from his or her biological sex, and may involve social, legal, or physical changes.
(6) "Gender transition procedures" means any medical or surgical service, including without limitation physician's services, inpatient and outpatient hospital services, or prescribed drugs related to gender transition that seeks to:
(a) alter or remove physical or anatomical characteristics or features that are typical for the individual's biological sex; or
(b) instill or create physiological or anatomical characteristics that resemble a sex different from the individual's biological sex, including without limitation medical services that provide puberty-blocking drugs, cross-sex hormones, or other mechanisms to promote the development of feminizing or masculinizing features in the opposite biological sex, or genital or nongenital gender reassignment surgery performed for the purpose of assisting an individual with a gender transition.
(7) "Genital gender reassignment surgery" means a medical procedure performed for the purpose of assisting an individual with a gender transition, including without limitation:
(a) surgical procedures such as penectomy, orchiectomy, vaginoplasty, clitoroplasty, or vulvoplasty for biologically male patients or hysterectomy or ovariectomy for biologically female patients;
(b) reconstruction of the fixed part of the urethra with or without a metoidioplasty; or
(c) phalloplasty, vaginectomy, scrotoplasty, or implantation of erection or testicular prostheses for biologically female patients,
(8) "Nongenital gender reassignment surgery" means medical procedures performed for the purpose of assisting an individual with a gender transition including without limitation:
(a) surgical procedures for biologically male patients, such as augmentation mammoplasty, facial feminization surgery, liposuction, lipofilling, voice surgery, thyroid cartilage reduction, gluteal augmentation, hair reconstruction, or various aesthetic procedures; or
(b) surgical procedures for biologically female patients, such as subcutaneous mastectomy, voice surgery, liposuction, lipofilling, pectoral implants, or various aesthetic procedures.
(9) "Puberty-blocking drugs" means gonadotropin-releasing hormone analogues or other synthetic drugs used in biological males to stop luteinizing hormone secretion and therefore testosterone secretion, or synthetic drugs used in biological females which stop the production of estrogens and progesterone, when used to delay or suppress pubertal development in children for the purpose of assisting an individual with a gender transition.
(10) "Public funds" means state, county, or local government monies, in addition to any department, agency, or instrumentality authorized or appropriated under state law or derived from any fund in which such moneys are deposited.

Section 40-47-310.A person younger than twenty-one years of age may not undergo gender transition procedures.

Section 40-47-320.Notwithstanding the provisions contained in Section 4-47-310, a physician may provide to a patient who is under twenty-one years of age:
(1) appropriate medical services to a person who was born with a medically verifiable disorder of sexual development, including, but not limited to, a person with external biological sexual characteristics that are ambiguous, including, but not limited to, people who were born with forty-six XX chromosomes with virilization or forty-six XY chromosomes with undervirilization or having both ovarian and testicular tissue;
(2) appropriate medical services to treat a disorder of sexual development arising because the person does not have normal sex chromosome structure, sex steroid hormone production, or sex steroid hormone action that was diagnosed through genetic or biochemical testing;
(3) treatment of any infection, injury, disease, or disorder that has been caused by or exacerbated by the performance of gender transition procedures, whether or not the gender transition procedure was performed in accordance with state or federal law; and
(4) any procedure undertaken because the person suffers from a physical disorder, physical injury, or physical illness that would, as certified by a physician, place the person in imminent danger of death or impairment of a major bodily function unless treated by the physician.

Section 40-47-330.In order for a person twenty-one years of age or older to receive gender transition procedures, he must first obtain a referral from his primary care physician and a referral from a licensed psychiatrist who must certify that the person has been diagnosed with gender dysphoria or a similar condition by the psychiatrist and that the psychiatrist believes that gender transition procedures would be appropriate for the person.

Section 40-47-340.Public funds may not be used directly or indirectly for gender reassignment services. 

SECTION 2.Chapter 32, Title 59 of the S.C. Code is amended by adding:

Section 59-32-35.(A) A comprehensive health education program may include instruction concerning gender dysphoria, gender identity disorder, and other psychological conditions that can result in a person identifying with a gender different than that of their sex assigned at birth or sex-related physical characteristics.
(B) Instruction provided to students pursuant to subsection (A) must:
(1) encourage students who are afflicted with a gender identity condition to seek assistance from a mental health professional; and
(2) not encourage a student to pursue gender transition procedures, as defined in Section 40-47-300.
(C) A teacher, school administrator, or other school employee who suspects or knows that a student suffers from gender dysphoria, gender identity disorder, and other psychological conditions that can result in a person identifying with a gender different than that of their sex assigned at birth or sex-related physical characteristics must notify the student's parent or legal guardian. The provisions in this subsection apply whether or not the teacher, school administrator, or school employee learns of the student's condition through instruction provided for in this section or otherwise.

SECTION 3.This act takes effect upon approval by the Governor.
----XX----
This web page was last updated on December 07, 2022 at 02:32 PM




 
 
PREFILED JAN 06 2023



REFERENCE TITLE: drag performers; drag
  shows; regulation




 
 
 
 
State of
  Arizona
Senate
Fifty-sixth
  Legislature
First Regular
  Session
2023
 
 
 




SB 1030




 




Introduced by 
Senator Kern
 



 
 
 
 
 
 
An Act
 
amending sections
11-811, 12-741, 13-1422 and 13-1425, Arizona Revised
Statutes; relating to adult oriented businesses.
 
 
(TEXT OF BILL BEGINS ON NEXT PAGE)
 




Be it enacted by the Legislature of the State of Arizona:
Section 1. Section 11-811, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:
START_STATUTE11-811. Zoning ordinance; zoning districts; definitions
A. Pursuant to this article, the board of
supervisors may shall adopt a zoning
ordinance in order to conserve and promote the public health, safety,
convenience and general welfare. The zoning ordinance and all
rezonings and zoning regulations amendments adopted under this article shall be
consistent with and conform to the adopted comprehensive plan. In addition to
the other matters that are required or authorized under this section and
article 1 of this chapter, the zoning ordinance:
1. Shall show the zoning districts designated as
appropriate for various classes of residential, business and industrial uses
and shall provide for the establishment of setback lines and other plans
providing for adequate light, air and parking facilities and for expediting
traffic within the districts. 
2. May establish the percentage of a lot or parcel
that may be covered by buildings and the size of yards, courts and other open
spaces.
3. Shall consider access to incident solar energy.
4. May provide for retirement community zoning
districts.
5. May Shall provide
for the regulation and use of business licenses, adult oriented business
manager permits, and adult service
provider permits, drag show permits and drag performer permits
in conjunction with the establishment or operation of adult oriented businesses
and facilities, including adult arcades, adult bookstores or video stores,
cabarets, adult live entertainment establishments, adult motion picture
theaters, adult theaters, massage establishments, establishments
that conduct drag shows and nude model studios. With respect to
cabarets, the ordinance shall not conflict with specific statutory or valid
regulatory requirements applicable to persons licensed to dispense alcoholic
beverages, but the ordinance may shall include
regulation of the age and conduct of erotic entertainers in a manner at least
as restrictive as rules adopted under title 4. Notwithstanding
section 11-812, a county in regulating or licensing businesses and
facilities pursuant to this paragraph may impose reasonable operating
requirements that affect the existing uses of businesses and facilities.
6. Shall designate and zone appropriate areas of
reasonable size in which there may be established with reasonable permanency
canneries, fertilizer plants, refineries, commercial feedlots, meat packing
plants, tallow works and other like businesses. A dairy operation,
including areas designated for the raising of replacement heifers or bulls
owned by the same dairy operation, is not subject to this paragraph, and is a
general agricultural purpose under subsection D, paragraph 2 of this section
and section 11-812, subsection A, paragraph 2. A replacement
heifer or bull raising operation of a dairy that is not on contiguous property
of the dairy is subject to this paragraph unless the operation begins within
one-quarter mile of the dairy. 
B. To carry out the purposes of this article, the
board may adopt overlay zoning districts and regulations applicable to
particular buildings, structures and land within individual
zones. For the purposes of this subsection, "overlay zoning
district" means a special zoning district that includes regulations that
modify regulations in another zoning district with which the overlay zoning
district is combined. Overlay zoning districts and regulations shall be
adopted pursuant to section 11-813. The provisions of overlay
zoning shall apply retroactively to authorize overlay zoning districts and
regulations adopted before April 20, 1993.
C. In accordance with article II, sections 1 and 2,
Constitution of Arizona, the board shall consider the individual property
rights and personal liberties of the residents of the county before adopting
any zoning ordinance.
D. This section does not authorize:
1. The imposition of dedications, exactions, fees or
other requirements that are not otherwise authorized by law.
2. The regulation or
restriction of the use or occupation of land or improvements for railroad,
mining, metallurgical, grazing or general agricultural purposes, if the tract
concerned is five or more contiguous commercial acres. For the
purposes of this paragraph, general agricultural purposes do not include the
cultivation of cannabis as defined in section 13-3401 or marijuana as
defined in section 13-3401 or 36-2801.
E. For the purposes of this section:
1. "Adult arcade" means any place to which
the public is permitted allowed or
invited and in which coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically,
electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines,
projectors or other image producing image-producing
devices are maintained to show images involving specific sexual activities or
specific anatomical areas to persons in booths or viewing rooms.
2. "Adult bookstore or video store" means
a commercial establishment that offers for sale or rent any of the following as
one of its principal business purposes:
(a) Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed
matter, photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes or reproductions or
slides or other visual representations that depict or describe specific sexual
activities or specific anatomical areas.
(b) Instruments, devices or paraphernalia that are
designed for use in connection with specific sexual activities.
3. "Adult live entertainment
establishment" means an establishment that features either:
(a) Persons who appear in a state of nudity.
(b) Live performances that are characterized by the
exposure of specific anatomical areas or specific sexual activities.
4. "Adult motion picture theater" means a
commercial establishment in which for any form of consideration films, motion
pictures, videocassettes, slides or other similar photographic reproductions
that are characterized by the depiction or description of specific sexual
activities or specific anatomical areas are predominantly shown.
5. "Adult oriented business" means adult
arcades, adult bookstores or video stores, cabarets, adult live entertainment
establishments, adult motion picture theaters, adult theaters, massage
establishments that offer adult service, establishments that
conduct drag shows, drag performers or nude model studios.
6. "Adult oriented business manager" means
a person on the premises of an adult oriented business who is authorized to
exercise overall operational control of the business.
7. "Adult service" means dancing, serving
food or beverages, modeling, posing, wrestling, singing, reading, talking,
listening or other performances or activities conducted for any consideration
in an adult oriented business by a person who is nude or seminude during all or
part of the time that the person is providing the service.
8. "Adult service provider" or
"erotic entertainer" means any natural person who provides an adult
service.
9. "Adult theater" means a theater,
concert hall, auditorium or similar commercial establishment that predominantly
features persons who appear in a state of nudity or who engage in live
performances that are characterized by the exposure of specific anatomical
areas or specific sexual activities.
10. "Cabaret" means an adult oriented
business licensed to provide alcoholic beverages pursuant to title 4, chapter
2, article 1.
11. "Discernibly turgid state" means the
state of being visibly swollen, bloated, inflated or distended.
12. "Drag performer" means
a person who dresses in clothing and uses makeup and other physical markers
opposite of the person's gender at birth to exaggerate gender signifiers and
roles and engages in singing, dancing or a monologue or skit in order to
entertain an audience.
13. "Drag show" means a
show or performance for entertainment at which a single performer or group of
performers dress in clothing and use makeup and other physical markers opposite
of the performer's or group of performers' gender at birth to exaggerate gender
signifiers and roles and engage in singing, dancing or a monologue or skit in
order to entertain an audience of two or more people.
12. 14. "Massage
establishment" means an establishment in which a person, firm, association
or corporation engages in or permits massage activities, including any method
of pressure on, friction against, stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping,
pounding, vibrating or stimulating of external soft parts of the body with the
hands or with the aid of any mechanical apparatus or electrical apparatus or
appliance. This paragraph does not apply to:
(a) Persons who are licensed pursuant to title 32,
chapter 7, 8, 13, 14 or 17.
(b) Registered nurses, licensed practical nurses or
technicians who are acting under the supervision of a physician who is licensed
pursuant to title 32, chapter 13 or 17.
(c) Registered nurse practitioners who are licensed
pursuant to title 32, chapter 15.
(d) Persons who are employed or acting as trainers
for a bona fide amateur, semiprofessional or professional athlete or athletic
team.
(e) Persons who are licensed pursuant to title 32,
chapter 3 or 5 if the activity is limited to the head, face or neck.
13. 15. "Nude
model studio":
(a) Means
a place in which a person who appears in a state of nudity or who displays
specific anatomical areas is observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured,
photographed or otherwise depicted by other persons who pay money or other
consideration. Nude model studio 
(b) Does
not include a proprietary school that is licensed by this state, a college,
community college or university that is supported entirely or in part by
taxation, a private college or university that maintains and operates
educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, community
college or university that is supported entirely or in part by taxation or a
structure to which the following apply:
(a) (i) A sign is not visible from the exterior of the
structure and no other advertising appears indicating that a nude person is
available for viewing.
(b) (ii) A student must enroll at least three days in
advance of a class in order to participate.
(c) (iii) No more than one nude or seminude model is on the
premises at any time.
14. 16. "Nude",
"nudity" or "state of nudity" means any of the following:
(a) The appearance of a human anus, genitals or a
female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola.
(b) A state of dress that fails to opaquely cover a
human anus, genitals or a female breast below a point immediately above the top
of the areola.
15. 17. "Principal
business purposes" means that a commercial establishment derives fifty
percent or more of its gross income from the sale or rental of items listed in
paragraph 2 of this subsection.
16. 18. "Seminude" means a state of dress in
which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region and female breast
below a point immediately above the top of the areola, as well as portions of
the body that are covered by supporting straps or devices.
17. 19. "Specific
anatomical areas" means any of the following:
(a) A human anus, genitals, the pubic region or a
female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola that is
less than completely and opaquely covered.
(b) Male genitals in a discernibly turgid state even
if completely and opaquely covered.
18. 20. "Specific
sexual activities" means any of the following:
(a) Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation
or arousal.
(b) Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or
simulated, including acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, oral
copulation or sodomy.
(c) Fondling or other erotic touching of the human
genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breast.
(d) Excretory functions as part of or in connection
with any of the activities under subdivision (a), (b) or (c) of this paragraph.
END_STATUTE
Sec. 2. Section 12-741, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:
START_STATUTE12-741. Unauthorized disclosure of intimate images; civil action;
exceptions; confidential information form; remedies; statute of limitations;
definitions
A. A person is liable in a civil action for
intentionally disclosing or threatening to disclose an intimate image of
another individual if the depicted individual suffers harm from the disclosure
or threatened disclosure and the person knew or should have known all of the
following:
1. The depicted individual did not consent to the
disclosure.
2. The intimate image was private.
3. The depicted individual was identifiable from the
image itself or from information that is displayed in connection with the
image.
B. Evidence that the depicted individual consented
to the creation of the image or that the depicted individual previously consented
to the disclosure of the image does not by itself establish that the depicted
individual consented to the disclosure of the intimate image or that the
depicted individual lacked a reasonable expectation of privacy.
C. A depicted individual who does not consent to the
specific sexual activities or state of nudity depicted in an intimate image of
the individual retains a reasonable expectation of privacy even if the image
was created when the depicted individual was in a public place.
D. Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, a
person is not liable under this section if the person proves that disclosing or
threatening to disclose the intimate image was any of the following:
1. Made in good faith
in any of the following:
(a) Law enforcement.
(b) A legal proceeding.
(c) Medical education or treatment.
2. Made in good faith in reporting or investigating
any of the following:
(a) Unlawful conduct.
(b) Unsolicited and unwelcome conduct.
3. Related to a matter of public concern or public
interest.
4. Reasonably intended to assist the depicted
individual.
5. Made by a parent, legal guardian or individual
with legal custody of a child and the depicted individual is the child unless
the image is disclosed with the intent to harm the depicted individual.
E. Subsection D of this section does not apply if
the plaintiff proves the disclosure was prohibited by law or made for the
purpose of sexual arousal, sexual gratification, humiliation, degradation or
monetary or commercial gain.
F. Disclosing or threatening to disclose an intimate
image is not a matter of public concern or public interest solely because the
depicted individual is a public figure.
G. If the plaintiff files with the court and serves
on the defendant a confidential information form that includes the excluded or
redacted plaintiff's name and other identifying characteristics, the court may
exclude or redact from all pleadings and documents filed in the action other
identifying characteristics of the plaintiff. The court may make
further orders as necessary to protect the identity and privacy of a plaintiff.
H. The prevailing plaintiff may recover:
1. The greater of:
(a) Economic and noneconomic damages that are
proximately caused by the defendant's disclosure or threatened disclosure,
including damages for emotional distress whether or not accompanied by other
damages.
(b) Statutory damages of not more than $10,000
against each defendant found liable under this section for all of the
defendant's disclosures and threatened disclosures that the plaintiff knew or
reasonably should have known when filing the action or that became known during
the pendency of the action. In determining the amount of statutory
damages under this subdivision, consideration must be given to the age of the
parties at the time of the disclosure or threatened disclosure, the number of
disclosures or threatened disclosures made by the defendant, the breadth of
distribution of the image by the defendant and other exacerbating or mitigating
factors. 
2. An amount equal to any monetary gain made by the
defendant from disclosing or threatening to disclose the intimate image.
3. Punitive damages.
4. Reasonable attorney fees and costs. 
5. Additional relief, including injunctive relief.
I. A civil action for an unauthorized disclosure may
not be brought later than four years after the date that the disclosure was
discovered or should have been discovered with the exercise of reasonable
diligence except that a threat to disclose may not be brought later than four
years after the date of the threat to disclose.
J. In a civil action brought by a depicted
individual who was a minor on the date of the disclosure or threat to disclose,
the time specified in subsection I of this section does not begin to run until
the depicted individual attains the age of majority.
K. For the purposes of this section:
1. "Consent" means affirmative, conscious
and voluntary authorization by an individual with legal capacity to give
authorization.
2. "Depicted individual" means an
individual whose body is shown in whole or in part in an intimate image.
3. "Disclose" or "disclosure"
means to display, distribute, publish, advertise or offer.
4. "Harm" includes physical harm, economic
harm and emotional distress whether or not accompanied by physical or economic
harm.
5. "Intimate image" means a photograph,
film, videotape, digital recording or other similar medium that shows a state
of nudity or specific sexual activities.
6. "Private" means either of the
following:
(a) Created or obtained under circumstances in which
a depicted individual had a reasonable expectation of privacy.
(b) Made accessible through theft, bribery,
extortion, fraud, false pretenses, voyeurism or exceeding authorized access to
an account, message, file, device, resource or property.
7. "Specific sexual activities" has the
same meaning prescribed in section 11-811.
8. "State of nudity" has the same meaning
prescribed in section 11-811, subsection E, paragraph 14
16, subdivision (a). END_STATUTE
Sec. 3. Section 13-1422, Arizona Revised
Statutes, is amended to read:
START_STATUTE13-1422. Adult oriented businesses; location; hours of operation;
injunction; classification; definitions
A. An adult oriented business shall not be located
within one-fourth mile of a child care facility, a private, public or
charter school, a public playground, a public recreational facility, a
residence or a place of worship. For the purposes of this subsection,
measurements shall be made in a straight line in all directions, without regard
to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest point on the property
line of a parcel containing an adult oriented business to the nearest point on
the property line of a parcel containing a child care facility, a private,
public or charter school, a public playground, a public recreational facility,
a residence or a place of worship. An adult oriented business
lawfully operating in conformity with this section does not violate this
section if a child care facility, a private, public or charter school, a public
playground, a public recreational facility, a residence or a place of worship
subsequently locates within one-fourth mile of the adult oriented business.
B. An adult arcade, adult bookstore or video store,
adult cabaret, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, escort agency or
nude model studio shall not remain open at any time between the hours of 1:00
a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on Monday through Saturday and between the hours of 1:00
a.m. and 12:00 noon on Sunday. A drag show shall not be
conducted between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on Monday through
Saturday and between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon on Sunday.
C. Subsection A of this section does not prohibit
counties or municipalities from enacting and enforcing ordinances that regulate
the location of adult oriented businesses.
D. Subsection B of this section does not prohibit
counties or municipalities from enacting and enforcing ordinances that regulate
an adult arcade, adult bookstore or video store, adult cabaret, adult motion
picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, or nude model studio or drag show in a
manner that is at least as restrictive as subsection B of this section.
E. If there is reason to believe that a violation of
subsection A of this section is being committed in any county or city, the
county attorney of the county shall, or a citizen of this state who resides in
the county or city in the citizen's own name may, maintain an action to abate
and prevent the violation and to enjoin perpetually any person who is
committing the violation and the owner, lessee or agent of the building or
place in or on which the violation is occurring from directly or indirectly
committing or permitting allowing the
violation.
F. A violation of subsection A or B of this section
is a class 1 misdemeanor. Each day of violation constitutes a separate offense.
G. For the purposes
of this section:
1. "Adult
arcade" has the same meaning prescribed in section 11-811.
2. "Adult bookstore or video store" has
the same meaning prescribed in section 11-811.
3. "Adult cabaret": excludes
(a) Does not
include any establishment licensed under title 4. and
(b) Includes
any nightclub, bar, restaurant or other similar commercial establishment that
regularly features:
(a) (i) Persons who appear in a state of nudity or who are
seminude.
(b) (ii) Live performances that are characterized by the
exposure of specific anatomical areas or specific sexual activities.
(c) (iii) Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or
other photographic reproductions that are characterized by the depiction or
description of specific sexual activities or specific anatomical areas.
4. "Adult motion picture theater" has the
same meaning prescribed in section 11-811.
5. "Adult oriented business" has the same
meaning prescribed in section 11-811.
6. "Adult theater" has the same meaning
prescribed in section 11-811.
7. "Drag show" means a show
or performance for entertainment at which a single performer or group of
performers dress in clothing and use makeup and other physical markers opposite
of the performer's or group of performers' gender at birth to exaggerate gender
signifiers and roles and engage in singing, dancing or a monologue or skit in
order to entertain an audience of two or more people.
7. 8. "Escort"
means a person who for consideration agrees or offers to act as a companion,
guide or date for another person or who agrees or offers to privately model
lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another person.
8. 9. "Escort
agency" means a person or business association that furnishes, offers to
furnish or advertises the furnishing of escorts as one of its primary business
purposes for any fee, tip or other consideration.
9. 10. "Nude
model studio" has the same meaning prescribed in section 11-811.
10. 11. "Nude",
"nudity" or "state of nudity" has the same meaning
prescribed in section 11-811.
11. 12. "Place
of worship" means a structure where persons regularly assemble for
worship, ceremonies, rituals and education relating to a particular form of
religious belief and which a reasonable person would conclude is a place of
worship by reason of design, signs or architectural or other features.
12. 13. "Residence"
means a permanent dwelling place.
13. 14. "Seminude"
has the same meaning prescribed in section 11-811.
14. 15. "Specific
anatomical areas" has the same meaning prescribed in section 11-811.
15. 16. "Specific
sexual activities" has the same meaning prescribed in section 11-811.
END_STATUTE
Sec. 4. Section 13-1425, Arizona Revised Statutes, is amended to read:
START_STATUTE13-1425. Unlawful disclosure of images depicting states of nudity or
specific sexual activities; classification; definitions
A. It is unlawful for a person to intentionally
disclose an image of another person who is identifiable from the image itself
or from information displayed in connection with the image if all of the
following apply:
1. The person in the image is depicted in a state of
nudity or is engaged in specific sexual activities.
2. The depicted person has a reasonable expectation
of privacy. Evidence that a person has sent an image to another person using
an electronic device does not, on its own, remove the person's reasonable
expectation of privacy for that image.
3. The image is disclosed with the intent to harm,
harass, intimidate, threaten or coerce the depicted person.
B. This section does not apply to any of the
following:
1. The reporting of unlawful conduct.
2. Lawful and common practices of law enforcement,
criminal reporting, legal proceedings or medical treatment.
3. Images involving voluntary exposure in a public
or commercial setting.
4. An interactive computer service, as defined in 47
United States Code section 230(f)(2), or an information service, as defined in
47 United States Code section 153, with regard to content wholly provided by
another party.
5. Any disclosure that is made with the consent of
the person who is depicted in the image.
C. A violation of this section is a class 5 felony,
except that a violation of this section is a:
1. Class 4 felony if the image is disclosed by
electronic means.
2. Class 1 misdemeanor if a person threatens to
disclose but does not disclose an image that if disclosed would be a violation
of this section.
D. For the purposes of this section: 
1. "Disclose" means display, distribute,
publish, advertise or offer.
2. "Disclosed by electronic means" means
delivery to an email address, mobile device, tablet or other electronic device
and includes disclosure on a website.
3. "Harm" means physical injury, financial
injury or serious emotional distress.
4. "Image"
means a photograph, videotape, film or digital recording.
5. "Reasonable
expectation of privacy" means the person exhibits an actual expectation of
privacy and the expectation is reasonable.
6. "Specific sexual activities" has the
same meaning prescribed in section 11-811, subsection E, paragraph 18 20, subdivisions (a) and (b).
7. "State of nudity" has the same meaning
prescribed in section 11-811, subsection E, paragraph 14
16, subdivision (a). END_STATUTE




Senate
File
129
-
Introduced


SENATE
FILE
129


BY
SALMON


A
BILL
FOR


An
Act
relating
to
actions
relative
to
treatment
or
1


intervention
regarding
the
discordance
between
a
minor’s
sex
2


and
gender
identity,
and
providing
civil
penalties.
3


BE
IT
ENACTED
BY
THE
GENERAL
ASSEMBLY
OF
THE
STATE
OF
IOWA:
4


TLSB
1922XS
(2)
90


pf/rh




S.F.
129


Section
1.
FINDINGS.
The
general
assembly
finds
all
of
the
1


following:
2


1.
“Sex”
is
the
biological
state
of
being
female
or
male,
3


based
on
sex
organs,
chromosomes,
and
endogenous
hormone
4


profiles.
An
individual’s
sex
is
genetically
encoded
into
5


an
individual
at
the
moment
of
conception,
and
it
cannot
be
6


changed.
7


2.
Some
individuals,
including
minors,
may
experience
8


discordance
between
their
sex
and
their
internal
sense
9


of
gender
identity.
Individuals
who
experience
severe
10


psychological
distress
as
a
result
of
this
discordance
may
be
11


diagnosed
with
gender
dysphoria.
12


3.
The
cause
of
the
individual’s
impression
of
discordance
13


between
sex
and
gender
identity
is
unknown.
Diagnosis
is
based
14


exclusively
on
the
individual’s
self-report
of
feelings
and
15


beliefs.
16


4.
This
internal
sense
of
discordance
is
not
permanent
or
17


fixed.
To
the
contrary,
numerous
studies
have
shown
that
a
18


substantial
majority
of
children
who
experience
discordance
19


between
their
sex
and
gender
identity
will
outgrow
the
20


discordance
once
they
go
through
puberty
and
will
eventually
21


have
a
gender
identity
that
aligns
with
their
sex.
22


5.
As
a
result,
taking
a
wait-and-see
approach
to
children
23


who
reveal
signs
of
gender
nonconformity
results
in
a
large
24


majority
of
such
children
resolving
to
a
gender
identity
25


congruent
with
their
sex
by
late
adolescence.
26


6.
Some
in
the
medical
community
are
aggressively
pushing
27


for
interventions
on
children
that
medically
alter
a
child’s
28


hormonal
balance
and
remove
healthy
external
and
internal
sex
29


organs
when
the
child
expresses
a
desire
to
appear
as
a
sex
30


different
from
the
child’s
own.
31


7.
This
course
of
treatment
for
children
commonly
begins
32


with
encouraging
and
assisting
a
child
to
socially
transition
33


to
dressing
and
presenting
as
the
opposite
sex.
In
the
case
34


of
prepubertal
children,
as
puberty
begins,
doctors
then
35


-1-


LSB
1922XS
(2)
90


pf/rh


1/
10




S.F.
129


administer
long-acting
gonadotropin-releasing
hormone
(GnRH)
1


agonists
or
puberty
blockers
that
suppress
the
pubertal
2


development
of
the
child.
This
use
of
puberty
blockers
for
3


gender
nonconforming
children
is
experimental
and
not
approved
4


by
the
United
States
food
and
drug
administration.
5


8.
After
puberty
is
blocked,
the
child
is
administered
6


cross-sex
hormonal
treatments
that
induce
the
development
7


of
secondary
sex
characteristics
of
the
other
sex,
such
as
8


causing
the
development
of
breasts
and
wider
hips
in
male
9


children
taking
estrogen
and
greater
muscle
mass,
bone
density,
10


body
hair,
and
a
deeper
voice
in
female
children
taking
11


testosterone.
Some
children
are
administered
these
hormones
12


independent
of
any
prior
pubertal
blockade.
13


9.
The
final
phase
of
treatment
is
for
the
child
to
undergo
14


cosmetic
and
other
surgical
procedures,
often
to
create
an
15


appearance
similar
to
that
of
the
opposite
sex.
These
surgical
16


procedures
may
include
a
mastectomy
to
remove
a
female
child’s
17


breasts
and
bottom
surgery
that
removes
a
child’s
healthy
18


reproductive
organs
and
creates
an
artificial
form
aiming
to
19


approximate
the
appearance
of
the
genitals
of
the
opposite
sex.
20


10.
For
children
who
are
placed
on
puberty
blockers
that
21


inhibit
their
bodies
from
experiencing
the
natural
process
of
22


sexual
development,
the
overwhelming
majority
will
continue
23


down
a
path
toward
cross-sex
hormones
and
cosmetic
surgery.
24


11.
This
unproven,
poorly
studied
series
of
interventions
25


results
in
numerous
harmful
effects
for
children,
as
well
as
26


risks
of
effects
simply
unknown
due
to
the
new
and
experimental
27


nature
of
these
interventions.


28


12.
Among
the
known
harms
from
puberty
blockers
are
29


diminished
bone
density.
The
full
effect
of
puberty
blockers
30


on
brain
development
and
cognition
are
yet
unknown,
though
31


reason
for
concern
is
now
present.
There
is
no
research
on
the
32


long-term
risks
to
children
of
persistent
exposure
to
puberty
33


blockers.
With
the
administration
of
cross-sex
hormones
comes


34


increased
risks
of
cardiovascular
disease,
thromboembolic


35


-2-


LSB
1922XS
(2)
90


pf/rh


2/
10




S.F.
129


stroke,
asthma,
chronic
obstructive
pulmonary
disease,
and
1


cancer.
2


13.
Puberty
blockers
prevent
gonadal
maturation
and
thus
3


render
children
taking
these
drugs
infertile.
Introducing
4


cross-sex
hormones
to
children
with
immature
gonads
as
a
5


direct
result
of
pubertal
blockade
is
expected
to
cause
6


irreversible
sterility.
Sterilization
is
also
permanent
for
7


those
who
undergo
surgery
to
remove
reproductive
organs,
8


and
such
children
are
likely
to
suffer
through
a
lifetime
9


of
complications
from
the
surgery,
infections,
and
other
10


difficulties
requiring
yet
more
medical
intervention.
11


14.
Several
studies
demonstrate
that
hormonal
and
surgical
12


interventions
often
do
not
resolve
the
underlying
psychological
13


issues
affecting
the
individual.
For
example,
individuals
14


who
undergo
cross-sex
cosmetic
surgical
procedures
have
been
15


found
to
suffer
from
elevated
mortality
rates
from
medical
16


and
psychological
conditions.
Their
suicide
rate
is
nineteen
17


times
higher
than
the
general
population.
They
experience
18


significantly
higher
rates
of
substance
abuse,
depression,
and
19


psychiatric
hospitalizations.
20


15.
Children,
and
often
their
parents,
are
unable
to
21


comprehend
and
fully
appreciate
the
risk
and
life
implications,
22


including
permanent
sterility,
that
result
from
the
use
of
23


puberty
blockers,
cross-sex
hormones,
and
surgical
procedures.
24


16.
For
these
reasons,
the
decision
to
pursue
a
course
of
25


hormonal
and
surgical
interventions
to
address
a
discordance
26


between
an
individual’s
sex
and
sense
of
gender
identity
27


should
not
be
presented
to
or
determined
for
children
who
28


are
incapable
of
comprehending
the
negative
implications
and
29


life-course
difficulties
resulting
from
these
interventions.
30


Sec.
2.
NEW
SECTION


.
147.164
Definitions.
31


As
used
in
this
chapter,
unless
the
context
otherwise
32


requires:
33


1.
“Gender
dysphoria”
means
discomfort
or
distress
over
a
34


marked
incongruence
between
an
individual’s
sex
and
the
gender
35


-3-


LSB
1922XS
(2)
90


pf/rh


3/
10





S.F.
129


with
which
the
individual
identifies.
1


2.
“Gender
nonconformity”
means
behavior
or
gender
2


expression
by
an
individual
that
does
not
match
gender
norms
3


for
the
individual’s
sex.
4


3.
“Government
agency”
means
a
state
agency
or
an
agent,
5


employee,
volunteer,
or
contractor
of
a
state
agency.
6


4.
“Medical
professional”
means
a
physician
or
surgeon
7


or
osteopathic
physician
and
surgeon
licensed
pursuant
to
8


chapter
148,
a
physician
assistant
licensed
pursuant
to
9


chapter
148C,
a
nurse
or
advanced
registered
nurse
practitioner
10


licensed
pursuant
to
chapter
152,
a
nurse
or
advanced
practice
11


registered
nurse
licensed
pursuant
to
chapter
152E,
or
a
12


psychiatrist
licensed
pursuant
to
chapter
148.
13


5.
“Mental
health
professional”
means
the
same
as
defined
14


in
section
228.1.
15


6.
“Minor”
or
“minor
child”
means
an
unemancipated
16


individual
under
eighteen
years
of
age.
17


7.
“Parent”
means
a
parent,
custodian,
or
guardian
as
18


defined
in
section
232.2.
19


8.
“Political
subdivision”
means
a
city,
county,
township,
20


school
district,
municipal
corporation,
special
purpose
21


district,
board,
department,
commission,
or
any
other
division
22


of
local
government,
or
an
agent,
employee,
volunteer,
or
23


contractor
of
such
entity.
24


9.
“Sex”
means
the
biological
state
of
being
female
or
25


male,
based
on
sex
organs,
chromosomes,
and
endogenous
hormone
26


profiles.
27


10.
“State
agency”
means
the
same
as
defined
in
section
28


8.11.


29


Sec.
3.
NEW
SECTION


.
147.165
Prohibited
practices.
30


1.
Notwithstanding
any
other
provision
of
law
to
the
31


contrary,
it
shall
be
unlawful
for
a
medical
professional
to
32


engage
in
any
of
the
following
practices
upon
a
minor,
or
to
33


cause
such
practice
to
be
performed
to
facilitate
a
minor’s
34


desire
to
present
or
appear
in
a
manner
that
is
inconsistent
35


-4-


LSB
1922XS
(2)
90


pf/rh


4/
10





S.F.
129


with
the
minor’s
sex:
1


a.
Performing
a
surgery
that
sterilizes,
including
2


castration,
vasectomy,
hysterectomy,
oophorectomy,
3


metoidioplasty,
orchiectomy,
penectomy,
phalloplasty,
and
4


vaginoplasty.
5


b.
Performing
a
mastectomy.
6


c.
Administering
or
supplying
the
following
medications
that
7


induce
transient
or
permanent
infertility:
8


(1)
Puberty-blocking
medication
to
stop
or
delay
normal
9


puberty.
10


(2)
Supraphysiologic
doses
of
testosterone
or
other
11


androgens
to
members
of
the
female
sex.
12


(3)
Supraphysiologic
doses
of
estrogen
or
synthetic
13


compounds
with
estrogenic
activity
to
members
of
the
male
sex.
14


d.
Removing
any
otherwise
healthy
or
nondiseased
body
part
15


or
tissue.
16


2.
A
medical
professional
who
engages
in
any
of
the
17


practices
prohibited
under
this
section
or
who
causes
such
18


practices
to
be
performed
shall
be
subject
to
revocation
of
19


licensure
and
other
appropriate
discipline
by
the
medical
20


professional’s
licensing
board.
A
medical
professional
who
21


violates
this
section
shall
also
be
subject
to
a
civil
penalty
22


of
up
to
one
thousand
dollars
per
occurrence
of
a
violation.
23


3.
This
section
shall
not
apply
to
the
good
faith
medical
24


decision
of
a
parent
of
a
minor
born
with
a
medically
25


verifiable
genetic
disorder
of
sexual
development,
including
26


any
of
the
following:
27


a.
A
minor
with
external
biological
sex
characteristics
that
28


are
irresolvably
ambiguous,
such
as
a
minor
born
with
forty-six
29


XX
chromosomes
with
virilization,
forty-six
XY
chromosomes
with
30


undervirilization,
or
with
both
ovarian
and
testicular
tissue.
31


b.
When
a
medical
professional
has
otherwise
diagnosed
32


a
disorder
of
sexual
development
in
which
the
medical
33


professional
has
determined
through
genetic
testing
that
the
34


minor
does
not
have
the
normal
sex
chromosome
structure
for
a
35


-5-


LSB
1922XS
(2)
90


pf/rh


5/
10




S.F.
129


male
or
female.
1


Sec.
4.
NEW
SECTION


.
147.166
Counseling.
2


A
government
agency,
political
subdivision,
or
any
3


organization
with
authority
to
license
or
discipline
the
4


members
of
a
profession
shall
not
prohibit,
impose
any
5


penalty,
or
take
any
adverse
action
against
any
member
of
such
6


profession
who
gives
or
receives
counsel,
advice,
guidance,
7


or
any
other
communication
however
described,
and
whether
or
8


not
in
exchange
for
a
fee,
in
accordance
with
this
chapter
and
9


consistent
with
the
professional’s
conscience
or
religious
10


belief.
11


Sec.
5.
NEW
SECTION


.
147.167
Protection
of
parental
rights.
12


1.
A
parent,
in
exercising
the
fundamental
right
to
care
13


for
the
parent’s
minor
child,
may
withhold
consent
for
any
14


treatment,
activity,
or
mental
health
service
that
is
designed
15


and
intended
to
form
the
minor
child’s
conception
of
sex
and
16


gender
or
to
treat
gender
dysphoria
or
gender
nonconformity.
A
17


government
agency
or
political
subdivision
shall
not
infringe
18


upon
or
impede
the
exercise
of
this
right.
19


2.
Notwithstanding
any
provision
to
the
contrary,
a
20


government
agency
or
political
subdivision
shall
not
encourage
21


or
coerce
a
minor
to
withhold
information
from
the
minor’s
22


parent,
and
shall
not
withhold
information
from
a
minor’s
23


parent
that
is
relevant
to
the
physical
or
mental
health
of
24


the
minor
exhibiting
symptoms
of
gender
dysphoria,
gender
25


nonconformity,
or
otherwise
demonstrating
a
desire
to
be
26


treated
in
a
manner
incongruent
with
the
minor’s
sex.
27


3.
Notwithstanding
any
provision
to
the
contrary,
if
a
28


government
agency
or
political
subdivision
has
knowledge
that
29


a
minor
under
the
care
or
supervision
of
a
government
agency
30


or
political
subdivision
has
exhibited
symptoms
of
gender
31


dysphoria,
gender
nonconformity,
or
has
otherwise
demonstrated
32


a
desire
to
be
treated
in
a
manner
incongruent
with
the
minor’s
33


sex,
the
government
agency
or
political
subdivision
shall
34


immediately
notify,
in
writing,
any
parent
of
the
minor.
The
35


-6-


LSB
1922XS
(2)
90


pf/rh


6/
10






S.F.
129


notice
shall
describe
all
of
the
relevant
circumstances
with
1


reasonable
specificity.
2


Sec.
6.
NEW
SECTION


.
147.168
Whistleblower
protection.
3


1.
An
individual
shall
not
be
discriminated
against
in
any
4


manner
because
the
individual
does
any
of
the
following:
5


a.
Provides
or
causes
to
be
provided
to
the
individual’s
6


employer,
the
office
of
the
attorney
general,
the
civil
rights
7


commission,
or
any
applicable
federal
agency,
information
8


relating
to
any
violation
of
this
chapter.
9


b.
Testifies
in
a
proceeding
concerning
a
violation
of
this
10


chapter.
11


c.
Assists
or
participates
in
a
proceeding
concerning
12


violation
of
this
chapter.
13


2.
Unless
the
disclosure
is
otherwise
specifically
14


prohibited
by
law,
an
individual
shall
not
be
discriminated
15


against
in
any
manner
because
the
individual
disclosed
16


information
under
this
chapter
that
the
individual
believes
17


evinces
any
of
the
following:
18


a.
A
violation
of
any
law,
rule,
or
regulation.
19


b.
A
violation
of
any
standard
of
care
or
other
ethical
20


guidelines
for
the
provision
of
any
health
care
service.
21


c.
Gross
mismanagement,
a
gross
waste
of
funds,
an
abuse
22


of
authority,
or
a
substantial
and
specific
danger
to
public
23


health
or
safety.
24


Sec.
7.
NEW
SECTION


.
147.169
Judicial
relief.
25


1.
A
person
harmed
by
a
violation
of
section
147.165
may
26


bring
an
action
for
injunctive
relief,
compensatory
and
special
27


damages,
and
any
other
relief
available
under
law
against
any
28


person
responsible
for
the
violation.
29


2.
A
person
harmed
by
a
violation
of
section
147.166,
30


147.167,
or
147.168
may
bring
an
action
for
injunctive
relief,
31


compensatory
and
special
damages,
and
any
other
relief
32


available
under
law
against
a
government
agency,
political
33


subdivision,
or
any
other
person
who
is
responsible
for
the
34


violation.
35


-7-


LSB
1922XS
(2)
90


pf/rh


7/
10






S.F.
129


3.
a.
Unless
paragraph
“b”
applies,
an
action
under
this
1


chapter
is
barred
unless
the
action
is
commenced
within
two
2


years
after
the
cause
of
action
accrues.
3


b.
Notwithstanding
any
provision
to
the
contrary,
including
4


sections
614.8
and
614.8A,
a
minor
injured
by
practices
5


prohibited
under
section
147.165
may
bring
an
action
during
the
6


minor’s
minority
through
a
parent
or
guardian,
and
may
bring
an
7


action
in
the
minor’s
own
name
upon
reaching
majority
and
for
8


twenty
years
after
reaching
majority.
9


4.
A
person
shall
have
standing
to
assert
a
claim
or
defense
10


under
this
section
if
the
person
is
adversely
affected
by
an
11


alleged
violation
or
the
alleged
failure
to
perform
a
duty
or
12


act
under
this
chapter.
13


5.
A
person
who
prevails
on
a
claim
brought
pursuant
to
14


this
section
shall
be
entitled
to
monetary
damages,
including
15


for
all
psychological,
emotional,
and
physical
harm
suffered,
16


reasonable
attorney
fees
and
costs,
and
any
other
appropriate
17


relief.
18


Sec.
8.
NEW
SECTION


.
147.170
Preemption
——
immunity.
19


1.
A
political
subdivision
is
preempted
from
enacting,
20


adopting,
maintaining,
or
enforcing
any
order,
ordinance,
rule,
21


regulation,
policy,
or
other
similar
measure
that
prohibits,
22


restricts,
limits,
controls,
directs,
or
otherwise
interferes
23


with
the
professional
conduct
and
judgment
of
a
mental
health
24


professional,
including
speech,
undertaken
under
this
chapter
25


within
the
course
of
treatment
and
communication
with
clients,
26


patients,
other
persons,
or
the
public,
including
but
not
27


limited
to
therapies,
counseling,
referrals,
and
education.
28


2.
The
attorney
general
or
a
mental
health
professional
29


adversely
affected
may
bring
an
action
for
injunctive
relief
30


to
prevent
or
restrain
a
violation
of
this
section.
A
mental
31


health
professional
may
recover
reasonable
costs
and
attorney’s
32


fees
incurred
in
obtaining
injunctive
relief
under
this
33


section.
34


3.
Sovereign
and
governmental
immunity
from
a
civil
action
35


-8-


LSB
1922XS
(2)
90


pf/rh


8/
10





S.F.
129


or
from
liability
do
not
apply
to
violations
of
this
chapter.
1


Sec.
9.
CODE
EDITOR
DIRECTIVE.
The
Code
editor
may
create
2


a
new
subchapter
in
chapter
147,
codifying
sections
147.164
3


through
147.170,
as
enacted
in
this
Act,
entitled
“Gender
and
4


Sexual
Discordance
——
Minors”.
5


EXPLANATION
6


The
inclusion
of
this
explanation
does
not
constitute
agreement
with
7


the
explanation’s
substance
by
the
members
of
the
general
assembly.
8


This
bill
includes
provisions
relating
to
practices
9


undertaken
to
cause
a
minor
to
physically
appear
more
like
10


a
person
of
the
opposite
sex
and
less
like
the
minor’s
own
11


sex,
or
to
conform
to
a
gender
identity
incongruent
with
the
12


minor’s
sex.
The
bill
contains
findings
regarding
the
harms
13


and
ineffectiveness
of
such
practices
and
contains
definitions
14


used
in
the
bill.
15


The
bill
makes
it
unlawful
for
a
medical
professional
to
16


perform
interventions
or
surgical
procedures
specified
in
17


the
bill
on
a
minor,
and
subjects
a
medical
professional
to
18


disciplinary
action
and
civil
penalties
for
providing
the
19


prohibited
treatments
to
or
performing
surgical
procedures
on
20


a
minor,
unless
the
treatment
occurs
based
on
the
good
faith
21


medical
decision
of
a
parent
of
a
minor
born
with
a
medically
22


verifiable
genetic
disorder
of
sexual
development.
23


The
bill
protects
the
freedom
of
members
of
a
profession
to
24


provide
counseling,
in
accordance
with
the
bill
and
consistent
25


with
the
individual’s
conscience
or
religious
belief.
26


The
bill
includes
protections
for
parents
to
decline
27


treatment,
activity,
or
mental
health
care
services
intended
28


to
form
their
minor
child’s
conception
of
sex
and
gender
or
29


to
treat
gender
dysphoria
or
gender
nonconformity.
The
bill
30


also
requires
government
agencies
and
political
subdivisions
31


to
inform
parents
of
any
information
relevant
to
the
physical
32


or
mental
health
of
a
minor
exhibiting
symptoms
of
gender
33


dysphoria,
gender
nonconformity,
or
otherwise
demonstrating
a
34


desire
to
be
treated
in
a
manner
incongruent
with
the
minor’s
35


-9-


LSB
1922XS
(2)
90


pf/rh


9/
10




S.F.
129


sex.
1


The
bill
includes
protections
for
individuals
who
provide
2


information
relating
to
violations
of
the
bill.
3


The
bill
provides
a
private
right
of
action
against
any
4


person
who
violates
the
bill,
and
creates
a
statute
of
5


limitations
for
minors
to
bring
certain
claims
within
20
years
6


of
reaching
majority.
7


The
bill
preempts
political
subdivisions
from
having
8


measures
in
place
that
interfere
with
the
professional
conduct
9


and
judgment
of
a
mental
health
professional
undertaken
10


under
the
bill
within
a
course
of
treatment
or
communication;
11


provides
for
injunctive
relief
for
a
violation
of
this
12


provision;
and
provides
that
sovereign
and
governmental
13


immunity
from
a
civil
action
or
from
liability
do
not
apply
to
14


violations
of
the
bill.
15


-10-


LSB
1922XS
(2)
90


pf/rh


10/
10





 



 


 

		By: Toth
H.B. No. 1752




 


 



 		
			

A BILL TO BE ENTITLED




 
			

AN ACT




 
			
relating to liability for the provision to certain children of 



 
			
procedures and treatments for gender transitioning, gender 



 
			
reassignment, or gender dysphoria; providing a civil penalty.



 
			
       BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF TEXAS:



 
			
       SECTION 1.  Title 4, Civil Practice and Remedies Code, is 



 
			
amended by adding Chapter 74B to be read as follows:



 
			
CHAPTER 74B. LIABILITY FOR CAUSING THE STERILIZATION, CASTRATION, 



 
			
OR GENITAL MUTILATION OF A MINOR.



 
			
       Sec. 74B.001.  LIABILITY PROVISIONS.  (a)  Any person who:



 
			
             (1)  knowingly prescribes puberty blockers or hormone 



 
			
therapy to a minor for the purpose of transitioning a child's 



 
			
biological sex as determined by the sex organs, chromosomes, and 



 
			
endogenous profiles of the child or affirming the child's 



 
			
perception of the child's sex if that perception is inconsistent 



 
			
with the child's biological sex;



 
			
             (2)  knowingly performs a sex-change operation on a 



 
			
minor; or



 
			
             (3)  knowingly aids or abets the conduct described in 



 
			
subsections (1)-(3), shall be strictly, absolutely, and jointly and 



 
			
severally liable in tort for any personal injuries resulting from 



 
			
the conduct described in this subsection.



 
			
       (b)  Notwithstanding any other law, a person injured by the 



 
			
conduct described in subsection (a) may bring a civil action 



 
			
against those who knowingly engaged in the conduct or knowingly 



 
			
aided or abetted the conduct that caused his injuries, and shall be 



 
			
entitled to recover:



 
			
             (1)  nominal damages;



 
			
             (2)  compensatory damages;



 
			
             (3)  punitive damages in an amount of not less than 



 
			
$10,000,000 from each defendant if irreversible sterilization or 



 
			
sexual dysfunction results, in addition to any compensatory damages 



 
			
that may be awarded; and



 
			
             (4)  costs and reasonable attorney's fees.



 
			
       (c)  Notwithstanding any other law, a person may bring an 



 
			
action under this section not later than the 20th anniversary of the 



 
			
date the cause of action accrues.



 
			
       (d)  Notwithstanding any other law, the following are not a 



 
			
defense to an action brought under this section:



 
			
             (1)  ignorance or mistake of law;



 
			
             (2)  a defendant's belief that the requirements or 



 
			
provisions of this chapter are unconstitutional or were 



 
			
unconstitutional;



 
			
             (3)  a defendant's reliance on any court decision that 



 
			
has been vacated, reversed, or overruled on appeal or by a 



 
			
subsequent court, even if that court decision had not been vacated, 



 
			
reversed, or overruled when the conduct described in subsection (a) 



 
			
occurred;



 
			
             (4)  a defendant's reliance on any state or federal 



 
			
court decision that is not binding on the court in which the action 



 
			
has been brought;



 
			
             (5)  a defendant's reliance on any federal statute, 



 
			
agency rule or action, or treaty that has been repealed, 



 
			
superseded, or declared invalid or unconstitutional, even if that 



 
			
federal statute, agency rule or action, or treaty had not been 



 
			
repealed, superseded, or declared invalid or unconstitutional when 



 
			
the conduct described in subsection (a) occurred;



 
			
             (6)  non-mutual issue preclusion or non-mutual claim 



 
			
preclusion;



 
			
             (7)  the consent of the plaintiff to the defendant's 



 
			
conduct;



 
			
             (8)  contributory or comparative negligence;



 
			
             (9)  assumption of risk;



 
			
             (10)  sovereign immunity, governmental immunity, 



 
			
official immunity, or qualified immunity;



 
			
             (11)  the plaintiff's waiver or purported waiver of 



 
			
their right to sue under this section;



 
			
             (12)  the plaintiff's failure to exhaust administrative 



 
			
remedies; or



 
			
             (13)  any claim that the enforcement of this chapter or 



 
			
the imposition of civil liability against the defendant will 



 
			
violate the constitutional rights of third parties, except as 



 
			
provided by Subsection (h).



 
			
       (e)  Notwithstanding any other law, including Chapter 17, 



 
			
Civil Practice and Remedies Code, the courts of this state shall 



 
			
have personal jurisdiction over any defendant sued under this 



 
			
section to the maximum extent permitted by the Fourteenth Amendment 



 
			
to the United States Constitution.



 
			
       (f)  Notwithstanding any other law, the law of Texas shall 



 
			
apply to any gender-transitioning treatment provided to a resident 



 
			
or citizen of Texas, regardless of where that treatment occurred, 



 
			
and to any civil action brought under this Section, to the maximum 



 
			
extent permitted by the Constitution of the United States and the 



 
			
Constitution of Texas. Any contractual choice-of-law provision 



 
			
that purports to require the law of a different jurisdiction to 



 
			
apply shall be void as against public policy, and may not be 



 
			
enforced in any state or federal court. This section shall apply 



 
			
extraterritorially to the maximum extent permitted by the 



 
			
Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of Texas.



 
			
       (g)  A civil action under this section may not be brought 



 
			
against any person that acted at the behest of federal agencies, 



 
			
contractors, or employees that are carrying out duties under 



 
			
federal law, if the imposition of liability upon that person would 



 
			
violate the doctrines of preemption or intergovernmental immunity.



 
			
       (h)  A defendant against whom an action is brought under this 



 
			
section may assert an affirmative defense to liability under this 



 
			
subsection if:



 
			
             (1)  the imposition of liability on the defendant will 



 
			
violate constitutional or federally protected rights that belong to 



 
			
the defendant personally; or



 
			
             (2)  the defendant



 
			
                   (A)  has standing to assert the rights of a third 



 
			
party under the tests for third-party standing established by the 



 
			
Supreme Court of the United States; and



 
			
                   (B)  demonstrates that the imposition of 



 
			
liability on the defendant will violate constitutional or federally 



 
			
protected rights belonging to that third party.



 
			
       (i)  Nothing in this section or chapter shall limit or 



 
			
preclude a defendant from asserting the unconstitutionality of any 



 
			
provision or application of Texas law as a defense to liability 



 
			
under this section, or from asserting any other defense that might 



 
			
be available under any other source of law.



 
			
       (j)  Notwithstanding any other law, the requirements of this 



 
			
section shall be enforced exclusively through the private civil 



 
			
actions described in Subsections (a) and (b). No direct or indirect 



 
			
enforcement of this section may be taken or threatened by the state, 



 
			
a political subdivision, a district or county attorney, or any 



 
			
officer or employee of this state or a political subdivision 



 
			
against any person or entity, by any means whatsoever, and no 



 
			
violation of this section may be used to justify or trigger the 



 
			
enforcement of any other law or any type of adverse consequence 



 
			
under any other law, except through the private civil actions 



 
			
described in Subsections (a) and (b). This section does not 



 
			
preclude or limit the enforcement of any other law or regulation 



 
			
against conduct that is independently prohibited by such other law 



 
			
or regulation, and that would remain prohibited by such other law or 



 
			
regulation in the absence of this section.



 
			
       Sec. 74B.002  VENUE.  (a)  Notwithstanding any other law, 



 
			
including Chapter 15, Civil Practice and Remedies Code, a civil 



 
			
action brought under Section 1 may be brought in:



 
			
             (1)  the county in which all or a substantial part of 



 
			
the events or omissions giving rise to the claim occurred;



 
			
             (2)  the county of residence for any one of the natural 



 
			
person defendants at the time the cause of action accrued;



 
			
             (3)  the county of the principal office in this state of 



 
			
any one of the defendants that is not a natural person; or



 
			
             (4)  the county of residence for the claimant if the 



 
			
claimant is a natural person residing in this state.



 
			
       (b)  If a civil action is brought under Section 1 in any one 



 
			
of the venues described by Subsection (a), then the action may not 



 
			
be transferred to a different venue without the written consent of 



 
			
all parties.



 
			
       (c)  Any contractual choice-of-forum provision that purports 



 
			
to require a civil action under Section 1 to be litigated in another 



 
			
forum shall be void as against public policy, and may not be 



 
			
enforced in any state or federal court.



 
			
       Sec. 74B.003.  IMMUNITY FROM SUIT AND LIMITS ON STATE-COURT 



 
			
JURISDICTION.  (a)  Notwithstanding any other law, the state and 



 
			
each of its officers and employees shall have sovereign immunity, 



 
			
its political subdivisions and each of their officers and employees 



 
			
shall have governmental immunity, and each officer and employee of 



 
			
this state or a political subdivision shall have official immunity 



 
			
(as well as sovereign or governmental immunity, as appropriate) in 



 
			
any action, claim, counterclaim, or any type of legal or equitable 



 
			
action that challenges the validity of any provision or application 



 
			
of this chapter, on constitutional grounds or otherwise, or that 



 
			
seeks to prevent or enjoin the state, its political subdivisions, 



 
			
or any officer, employee, or agent of this state or a political 



 
			
subdivision from enforcing any provision or application of this 



 
			
chapter, or from hearing, adjudicating, or docketing a civil action 



 
			
brought under Section 1, unless that immunity has been abrogated or 



 
			
preempted by federal law in a manner consistent with the 



 
			
Constitution of the United States. The sovereign immunity conferred 



 
			
by this section upon the state and each of its officers and 



 
			
employees includes the constitutional sovereign immunity 



 
			
recognized by the Supreme Court of the United States in Seminole 



 
			
Tribe of Florida v. Florida, 517 U.S. 44 (1996), and Alden v. Maine, , 517 U.S. 44 (1996), and Alden v. Maine, 



 
			
527 U.S. 706 (1999), which applies in both state and federal court 



 
			
and which may not be abrogated by Congress or by any state or 



 
			
federal court except pursuant to legislation authorized by section 



 
			
5 of the Fourteenth Amendment, by the Bankruptcy Clause of Article 



 
			
I, or by Congress's powers to raise and support Armies and to 



 
			
provide and maintain a Navy.



 
			
       (b)  Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the 



 
			
contrary, the immunities conferred by Subsection (a) shall apply in 



 
			
every court, both state and federal, and in every adjudicative 



 
			
proceeding of any type whatsoever.



 
			
       (c)  Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the 



 
			
contrary, no provision of state law may be construed to waive or 



 
			
abrogate an immunity described in Subsection (a) unless it 



 
			
expressly waives or abrogates immunity with specific reference to 



 
			
this section.



 
			
       (d)  Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the 



 
			
contrary, no attorney representing the state, its political 



 
			
subdivisions, or any officer, employee, or agent of this state or a 



 
			
political subdivision is authorized or permitted to waive an 



 
			
immunity described in Subsection (a) or take any action that would 



 
			
result in a waiver of that immunity, and any such action or 



 
			
purported waiver shall be regarded as a legal nullity and an ultra 



 
			
vires act.



 
			
       (e)  Notwithstanding any other law, including Chapter 37, 



 
			
Civil Practice and Remedies Code, and sections 22.002, 22.221, and 



 
			
24.007 through 24.011, Government Code, no court of this state may 



 
			
award declaratory or injunctive relief, or any type of writ, that 



 
			
would pronounce any provision or application of this subchapter 



 
			
invalid or unconstitutional, or that would restrain the state, its 



 
			
political subdivisions, any officer, employee, or agent of this 



 
			
state or a political subdivision, or any person from enforcing any 



 
			
provision or application of this chapter, or from hearing, 



 
			
adjudicating, docketing, or filing a civil action brought under 



 
			
Section 1, and no court of this state shall have jurisdiction to 



 
			
consider any action, claim, or counterclaim that seeks such relief.



 
			
       (f)  Nothing in this section or chapter shall be construed to 



 
			
prevent a litigant from asserting the invalidity or 



 
			
unconstitutionality of any provision or application of this chapter 



 
			
as a defense to any action, claim, or counterclaim brought against 



 
			
that litigant.



 
			
       (g)  Notwithstanding any other law, any judicial relief 



 
			
issued by a court of this state that disregards the immunities 



 
			
conferred by Subsection (a), or the limitations on jurisdiction and 



 
			
relief imposed by Subsection (e), shall be regarded as a legal 



 
			
nullity because it was issued by a court without jurisdiction, and 



 
			
may not be enforced or obeyed by any officer, employee, or agent of 



 
			
this state or a political subdivision, judicial or otherwise.



 
			
       (h)  Notwithstanding any other law, any writ, injunction, or 



 
			
declaratory judgment issued by a court of this state that purports 



 
			
to restrain the state, its political subdivisions, any officer, 



 
			
employee, or agent of this state or a political subdivision, or any 



 
			
person from hearing, adjudicating, docketing, or filing a civil 



 
			
action brought under Section 1 shall be regarded as a legal nullity 



 
			
and a violation of the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth 



 
			
Amendment, and may not be enforced or obeyed by any officer, 



 
			
employee, or agent of this state or a political subdivision, 



 
			
judicial or otherwise.



 
			
       (i)  Notwithstanding any other law, any officer, employee, 



 
			
or agent of this state or a political subdivision, judicial or 



 
			
otherwise, who issues, enforces, or obeys a writ, injunction, or 



 
			
declaratory judgment described in Subsection (h) shall be subject 



 
			
to suit by any person who is prevented from or delayed in bringing a 



 
			
civil action under Section 1, and a claimant who prevails in an 



 
			
action brought under this section shall recover:



 
			
             (1)  injunctive relief;



 
			
             (2)  compensatory damages;



 
			
             (3)  punitive damages of not less than $100,000; and



 
			
             (4)  costs and reasonable attorney's fees.



 
			
       (j)  Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the 



 
			
contrary, any person who violates Subsections (e) or (h):



 
			
             (1)  may not assert and shall not be entitled to any 



 
			
type of immunity defense, including sovereign immunity, 



 
			
governmental immunity, official immunity, or judicial immunity;



 
			
             (2)  may not and shall not be indemnified for any award 



 
			
of damages or costs and attorneys' fees entered against them, or for 



 
			
the costs of their legal defense; and



 
			
             (3)  may not and shall not receive or obtain legal 



 
			
representation from the attorney general of this state in any 



 
			
action brought under Subsection (i).



 
			
       (k)  Notwithstanding any other law, any person who sues and 



 
			
seeks any writ, injunction, or declaratory judgment that would 



 
			
restrain any person from hearing, adjudicating, docketing, or 



 
			
filing a civil action brought under Section 1 shall pay the costs 



 
			
and attorneys' fees of the person sued. A person may bring a civil 



 
			
action to recover these costs and attorneys' fees in state or 



 
			
federal court. It shall not be defense to a civil action brought 



 
			
under this Subsection that:



 
			
             (1)  the plaintiff failed to seek recovery of costs or 



 
			
attorney's fees in the underlying action;



 
			
             (2)  the court in the underlying action declined to 



 
			
recognize or enforce the requirements of this Section; or



 
			
             (3)  the court in the underlying action held that any 



 
			
provisions of this Section are invalid, unconstitutional, or 



 
			
preempted by federal law, notwithstanding the doctrines of issue or 



 
			
claim preclusion.



 
			
       SECTION 2.  This Act takes effect immediately if it receives 



 
			
a vote of two-thirds of all the members elected to each house, as 



 
			
provided by Section 39, Article III, Texas Constitution. If this 



 
			
Act does not receive the vote necessary for immediate effect, this 



 
			
Act takes effect September 1, 2023.








2023-2024 Bill 3616 Text of Previous Version (Jan. 11, 2023) - South Carolina Legislature Online
 

South Carolina General Assembly125th Session, 2023-2024Bill 3616Indicates Matter StrickenIndicates New Matter(Text matches printed bills. Document has been reformatted to meet World Wide Web specifications.)








A bill

TO AMEND THE SOUTH CAROLINA CODE OF LAWS by enacting THE "DEFENSE OF CHILDREN'S INNOCENCE ACT" BY ADDING SECTION 6-1-200 SO AS TO PROVIDE THAT ANY BUSINESS WHERE DRAG SHOWS ARE HELD IS DEEMED TO BE A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS FOR ALL LOCAL ORDINANCES RELATING TO A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS; BY ADDING SECTION 6-1-210 SO AS TO PROHIBIT A STATE AGENCY, POLITICAL SUBDIVISION, AND ANY ENTITY THAT IS SUPPORTED IN WHOLE OR IN PART BY PUBLIC FUNDS from using ANY PUBLIC FUNDS TO HOST OR PROVIDE A DRAG SHOW; AND BY AMENDING SECTION 16-15-385, RELATING TO DISSEMINATING HARMFUL MATERIALS TO MINORS, SO AS TO INCLUDE THE OFFENSE OF ALLOWING A MINOR TO VIEW A DRAG SHOW.

Be it enacted by the General Assembly of the State of South Carolina:

SECTION 1.   This act may be cited as the "Defense of Children's Innocence Act".

SECTION 2.   Article 1, Chapter 1, Title 6 of the S.C. Code is amended by adding:

   Section 6-1-200.   (A)   Any business where drag shows are held is deemed to be a sexually oriented business for all local ordinances relating to a sexually oriented business.  A local government must enforce such ordinances against a business that holds drag shows in the same manner as set forth in the ordinance.
   (B)   No minor may attend or view a drag show performance.
   (C)   For purposes of this section:
      (1)   "Drag show" means a performance in which a performer exhibits a gender identity that is different than the performer's gender assigned at birth using clothing, makeup, or other physical markers and sings, lip syncs, dances, or otherwise performs before an audience for entertainment, and is intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to nudity or state of nudity, seminudity or state of seminudity, specific sexual acts, or specific anatomical areas.
      (2)   "Nudity" or "state of nudity" means the appearance of bare human buttocks, male genitals, female genitals, or female breasts or the use of opaque material that gives the appearance of less than completely or opaquely covered human buttocks, male genitals, female genitals, or female breasts.
      (3)   "Seminudity" or "state of seminudity" means a state of dress in which clothing, or opaque material that gives the appearance of less than completely or opaquely covered human buttocks, male genitals, female genitals, or female breasts, covers no more than the genitals, pubic region, areola of the female breast, and those portions of the body covered by supporting straps and devices.
      (4)   "Specified anatomical areas" means:
         (a)   less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breast areola; or
         (b)   human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state even if completely and opaquely covered.
      (5)   'Specified sexual activities' includes:
         (a)   the fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts; 
         (b)   sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy; 
         (c)   masturbation, actual or simulated; or 
         (d)   human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; or 
         (e)   the fondling, erotic touching, or other such contact with an animal by a human being; or 
         (f)   excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subitems (a) through (e). 

   Section 6-1-210.   No state agency, political subdivision, including school districts, or any entity that is supported in whole or in part by public funds may use any public funds to host or provide a drag show.  If any such institution whose funding is commingled hosts or provides for a drag show, the expenditures of the drag show are deemed to be from public funds.  If any such institution violates the provision of this section, then the appropriate official in charge of disbursing public funds, must cease disbursing funds to the offending institution.  For purposes of this section, "drag show" has the same meaning as provided in Section 6-1-200.

SECTION 3.   Section 16-15-385 of the S.C. Code is amended to read:

   Section 16-15-385.   (A) A person commits the offense of disseminating harmful material to minors if, knowing the character or content of the material, he:
      (1) sells, furnishes, presents, or distributes to a minor material that is harmful to minors; or
      (2) allows a minor to review or peruse material that is harmful to minors.
   A person does not commit an offense under this subsection when he employs a minor to work in a theater if the minor's parent or guardian consents to the employment and if the minor is not allowed in the viewing area when material harmful to minors is shown.
   (B) A person commits the offense of exhibiting a harmful performance to a minor if, with or without consideration and knowing the character or content of the performance, he allows a minor to view a live performance which is harmful to minors. For purposes of this subsection, allowing a minor to view a drag show, as defined in Section 6-1-200, is harmful to minors and punishable pursuant to this section.
   (C) Except as provided in item (3) of this subsection, mistake of age is not a defense to a prosecution under this section.  It is an affirmative defense under this section that:
      (1) the defendant was a parent or legal guardian of a minor, but this item does not apply when the parent or legal guardian exhibits or disseminates the harmful material for the sexual gratification of the parent, guardian, or minor.;
      (2) the defendant was a school, church, museum, public, school, college, or university library, government agency, medical clinic, or hospital carrying out its legitimate function, or an employee or agent of such an organization acting in that capacity and carrying out a legitimate duty of his employment.; or
      (3) before disseminating or exhibiting the harmful material or performance, the defendant requested and received a driver's license, student identification card, or other official governmental or educational identification card or paper indicating that the minor to whom the material or performance was disseminated or exhibited was at least eighteen years old, and the defendant reasonably believed the minor was at least eighteen years old.
   (D) A person who violates the provisions of this section is guilty of a felony and, upon conviction, must be imprisoned not more than ten years or fined not more than five thousand dollars, or both.

SECTION 4.   This act takes effect upon approval by the Governor.
----XX----
This web page was last updated on January 11, 2023 at 11:09 AM





MISSISSIPPI LEGISLATURE
2023 Regular Session
To: Education
By: Senator(s) McDaniel
Senate Bill 2764
AN ACT TO PROVIDE THAT THE LOCAL SCHOOL BOARD OF EVERY PUBLIC
SCHOOL DISTRICT AND PUBLIC CHARTER SCHOOL SHALL ADOPT A PROCEDURE FOR NOTIFYING
THE PARENT OF A STUDENT ENROLLED IN THE SCHOOL REGARDING MENTAL, EMOTIONAL AND PHYSICAL
HEALTH OF THE STUDENT AND AVAILABLE HEALTH-RELATED SERVICES; TO PROVIDE FOR PARENTAL
CONSENT FOR SUCH SERVICES; TO AUTHORIZE STUDENT WELL-BEING QUESTIONNAIRES; TO PROHIBIT
SCHOOL PERSONNEL FROM PROVIDING OR ALLOWING A THIRD PARTY TO PROVIDE INSTRUCTION
REGARDING SEXUAL ORIENTATION OR GENDER IDENTITY TO STUDENTS ENROLLED IN K-12 IN
A MANNER THAT IS NOT AGE OR DEVELOPMENTALLY APPROPRIATE; TO AMEND SECTION 37-9-59,
MISSISSIPPI CODE OF 1972; TO AUTHORIZE DISMISSAL OR SUSPENSION FOR A CERTIFIED TEACHER
WHO DOES NOT COMPLY WITH THE PROVISIONS OF THIS ACT RELATING TO SEXUAL ORIENTATION
OR GENDER IDENTITY; AND FOR RELATED PURPOSES.
     BE IT ENACTED BY THE
LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF MISSISSIPPI:
     SECTION 1.  (1)
 The local school board of every public school district in the State of Mississippi
shall adopt a procedure for notifying the parent of a student enrolled in the district
regarding any change in:
          (a)  Service provided to
or monitoring of the student related to the student's mental, emotional, or physical
health or well-being; or
          (b)  The district's ability
to provide a safe and supportive learning environment for the student.
     (2)  A procedure adopted under
subsection (1) of this section must reinforce the fundamental right of a parent
to make decisions regarding the upbringing and control of the parent's child by
requiring school district personnel to:
          (a)  Encourage a student
to discuss issues relating to the student's well-being with the student's parent;
or
          (b)  Facilitate a discussion
described under paragraph (a) of this subsection.
     (3)  A school district may not
adopt a procedure or a student-support form, including a student well-being questionnaire
or health-screening form, that:
          (a)  Prohibits a district
employee from notifying the parent of a student regarding:
               (i)  Information about
the student's mental, emotional, or physical health or well-being; or
               (ii)  A change in services
provided to or monitoring of the student related to the student's mental, emotional,
or physical health or well-being.
          (b)  Encourage or has the
effect of encouraging a student to withhold from the student's parent information
described by subsection (1)(a); or
          (c)  Prevents a parent from
accessing education or health records concerning the parent's child.
     (4)  Subsections (1) and (2)
do not require the disclosure of information to a parent if a reasonably prudent
person would believe the disclosure is likely to result in the student suffering
abuse or neglect, as those terms are defined by law.
     (5)  A school district employee
may not discourage or prohibit parental knowledge of or involvement in critical
decisions affecting a student's mental, emotional, or physical health or well-being.
     (6)  Any student support services
training developed or provided by a school district to district employees must comply
with any student services guidelines, standards, and frameworks established by the
State Board of Education and the Mississippi Department of Education.
     (7)  Before the first instructional
day of each school year, a school district shall provide to the parent of each student
enrolled in the district written notice of each health-related service offered at
the district campus the student attends.  The notice must include a statement of
the parent's right to withhold consent for or decline a health-related service.
 A parent's consent to a health-related service does not waive a requirement of
subsection (1), (2), or (5).
     (8)  Before administering a student
a well-being questionnaire or health-screening form to a student enrolled in kindergarten
through twelfth grade, a school district must provide a copy of the questionnaire
or form to the student's parent and obtain the parent's consent to administer the
questionnaire or form.
     (9)  Not later than August 1,
2024, the State Department Education and the State Board of Education, and the Commission
on Educator Certification, as appropriate, shall review and revise as necessary
the following to ensure compliance with this section:
          (a)  School counseling frameworks
and standard;
          (b)  Educator practices
and professional conduct principles; and
          (c)  Any other student services
personnel guidelines, standards, or frameworks.
     (10)  This section is fully applicable
to governing boards and employees of public charter schools.
     SECTION 2.  A school
district, open-enrollment charter school, or district or charter school employee
may not provide or allow a third party to provide instruction regarding sexual orientation
or gender identity:
          (a)  To students enrolled
in kindergarten through twelfth grade; or
          (b)  In a manner that is
not age-appropriate or developmentally appropriate.
     SECTION 3.  Section
37-9-59, Mississippi Code of 1972, is amended as follows:
     37-9-59.  For incompetence,
neglect of duty, immoral conduct, intemperance, brutal treatment of a pupil,
failure to comply with restrictions on instruction regarding sexual orientation
and gender identity prescribed in this act, or other good cause the
superintendent of schools may dismiss or suspend any licensed employee in any
school district.  Before being so dismissed or suspended any licensed employee
shall be notified of the charges against him and he shall be advised that he is
entitled to a public hearing upon said charges.  Provided, however, that a
school superintendent whose employment has been terminated under this section
shall not have the right to request a hearing before the school board or a
hearing officer.  Provided, however, that a licensed employee in a conservator
school district whose employment has been terminated under this section for
good cause as determined by a conservator appointed by the State Board of Education
shall not have a right to request a hearing before the school board, a hearing
officer or the State Board of Education.  The conservator has the right to
immediately terminate a licensed employee under this section.  In the event the
continued presence of said employee on school premises poses a potential threat
or danger to the health, safety or general welfare of the students, or, in the
discretion of the superintendent, may interfere with or cause a disruption of
normal school operations, the superintendent may immediately release said
employee of all duties pending a hearing if one is requested by the employee.  In
the event a licensed employee is arrested, indicted or otherwise charged with a
felony by a recognized law enforcement official, the continued presence of the
licensed employee on school premises shall be deemed to constitute a disruption
of normal school operations.  The school board, upon a request for a hearing by
the person so suspended or removed shall set a date, time and place for such
hearing which shall be not sooner than five (5) days nor later than thirty (30)
days from the date of the request.  The procedure for such hearing shall be as
prescribed for hearings before the board or hearing officer in Section 37-9-111. 
From the decision made at said hearing, any licensed employee shall be allowed
an appeal to the chancery court in the same manner as appeals are authorized in
Section 37-9-113.  Any party aggrieved by action of the chancery court may
appeal to the Mississippi Supreme Court as provided by law.  In the event that
a licensed employee is immediately relieved of duties pending a hearing, as
provided in this section, said employee shall be entitled to compensation for a
period up to and including the date that the initial hearing is set by the
school board, in the event that there is a request for such a hearing by the
employee.  In the event that an employee does not request a hearing within five
(5) calendar days of the date of the notice of discharge or suspension, it shall
constitute a waiver of all rights by said employee and such discharge or
suspension shall be effective on the date set out in the notice to the employee.
     The school board of every
school district in this state is hereby prohibited from denying employment or
reemployment to any person as a superintendent, principal or licensed employee,
as defined in Section 37-19-1, or as a noninstructional personnel, as defined
in Section 37-9-1, for the single reason that any eligible child of such person
does not attend the school system in which such superintendent, principal,
licensed employee or noninstructional personnel is employed.
     The provisions of this
section shall be fully applicable to any administrator or employee of the
Mississippi School of the Arts (MSA).
     SECTION 4.  This act
shall take effect and be in force from and after July 1, 2023.










2023-2024 Bill 3564 Text of Previous Version (Dec. 15, 2022) - South Carolina Legislature Online
 

South Carolina General Assembly125th Session, 2023-2024Bill 3564Indicates Matter StrickenIndicates New Matter(Text matches printed bills. Document has been reformatted to meet World Wide Web specifications.)








A bill

to amend the South Carolina Code of Laws BY enactING the "Eliminate Economic Boycotts Act"; and by adding Section 11-1-130 so as to require companies that contract with the state to certify that they do not boycott or discriminate against certain companies.

Whereas, numerous essential American industries-including fossil fuel production, agriculture, timber production, and firearms-are being targeted for boycotting, divesting, and sanctioning by large corporations and public and private institutional investors; and

Whereas, the goal of these colluding parties is to starve targeted legal industries of capital, restrict their productivity, and redirect that capital to favored industries; and

Whereas, these parties are working in concert with many state and federal lawmakers and regulators, as evidenced most recently by new climate disclosure rules from the Securities and Exchange Commission; and

Whereas, restricting the supply of energy and other essential commodities, without effective substitutes for those commodities, only serves to raise prices on consumers, profoundly impacting the poorest among us; and

Whereas, denying financing to American companies, who are among the most socially and environmentally responsible companies in the world, only serves to support hostile nations and less responsible producers; and

Whereas, banks and insurance companies are increasingly denying financing to creditworthy companies to market their environmental credentials to the detriment of consumers, shareholders, and society; and

Whereas, institutional investors are divesting from entire industries and pressuring corporations to commit to environmental goals, such as reducing greenhouse gas emissions to zero by 2050, to burnish their environmental credentials or promote their own environmental, social, and governance funds at the expense of investor returns; and

Whereas, large investment firms, through their proxy votes on shareholder resolutions and board elections, are colluding to force companies to direct money, time, and attention away from their core responsibility of increasing shareholder returns, driving capital allocation decisions and political change outside the democratic process; and

Whereas, corporations are boycotting and sanctioning essential legal industries, such as fossil fuel and agriculture producers, by denying them capital, refusing to provide them with products or services or imposing undue burdens on them; and

Whereas, the collusion of corporations, and institutions to boycott, divest from, or sanction any industry may violate existing antitrust and fiduciary duty laws and harms consumers, shareholders, and this State; and

Whereas, states, when financially prudent, should avoid doing business with companies that engage in such potentially illegal conduct, and threaten harm to this State, its businesses, and citizens. Now, therefore,

Be it enacted by the General Assembly of the State of South Carolina:

SECTION 1.This act may be cited as the "Eliminate Economic Boycotts Act".

SECTION 2.Chapter 1, Title 11 of the S.C. Code is amended by adding:

Section 11-1-130.(A) As used in this section:
(1) "Company" means a for-profit organization, association, corporation, partnership, joint venture, limited partnership, limited liability partnership, or limited liability company, including a wholly owned subsidiary, majority-owned subsidiary, parent company, or affiliate of those entities or business associations. For the purposes of this section, "company" does not include sole proprietorships.
(2) "Governmental entity" means a state agency or political subdivision of this State.
(3) "Ordinary business purpose" does not include any purpose to further social, political, or ideological interests. A company may reasonably be determined to have taken an action, or considered a factor, with a purpose to further social, political, or ideological interests based upon evidence indicating such a purpose including, but not limited to, branding, advertising, statements, explanations, reports, letters to clients, communications with portfolio companies, statements of principles, or commitments, or participation in, affiliation with, or status as a signatory to, any coalition, initiative, joint statement of principles, or agreement.
(4) "Economic boycott" means, without an ordinary business purpose, refusing to deal with, terminating business activities with, or otherwise taking any commercial action that is intended to penalize, inflict economic harm on, limit commercial relations with, or change or limit the activities of a company because the company, without violating controlling federal or state law:
(a) engages in the exploration, production, utilization, transportation, sale, or manufacturing of fossil fuel-based energy, timber, mining, or agriculture;
(b) engages in, facilitates, or supports the manufacture, distribution, sale, or use of firearms;
(c) does not meet, is not expected to meet, or does not commit to meet environmental standards or disclosure criteria, in particular to eliminate, reduce, offset, or disclose greenhouse gas emissions;
(d) does not meet, is not expected to meet, or does not commit to meet corporate board, or employment, composition, compensation, or disclosure criteria that incorporates characteristics protected in this State pursuant to state law;
(e) does not facilitate, is not expected to facilitate, or does not commit to facilitate access to abortion, sex or gender change, or transgender surgery; or
(f) does business with a company described by subitems (a)-(e).
(B)(1) This section applies only to a contract that:
(a) is between a governmental entity and a company with ten or more full-time employees; and
(b) will pay a company fifty thousand dollars or more over the term of the contract that is to be paid wholly or partly from public funds of the governmental entity; provided, however, the provisions of this subsection apply separately to all companies in a multiple party contract.
(2) Except as provided by item (3), a governmental entity may not enter into a contract with a company for goods or services unless the contract contains a written verification from the company that it:
(a) does not engage in economic boycotts or use any environmental, social, and governance (ESG) standards; and
(b) will not engage in economic boycotts during the term of the contract.
(3) Item (2) does not apply to a governmental entity that determines the requirements of item (2):
(a) are inconsistent with the governmental entity's constitutional or statutory duties related to the issuance, incurrence, or management of debt obligations or the deposit, custody, management, borrowing, or investment of funds; or
(b) prevent the governmental entity from obtaining the supplies or services to be provided in an economically practicable manner.
(C)(1) A federal or state entity may not take action to penalize or threaten to penalize any financial institution for compliance with this section.
(2) Any party taking such action must have caused harm to this State, including by interfering with the state's sovereign interests in administering its programs and with the state's commercial relationships with its financial institutions.
(D)(1) This section, or any contract subject to this section, may be enforced by the Attorney General. 
(2) If the Attorney General has reasonable cause to believe that a person has engaged in, is engaging in, or is about to engage in, a violation of this section, he may:
(a) require such person to file on such forms as he prescribes a statement or report in writing, under oath, as to all the facts and circumstances concerning the violation, and such other data and information as he considers necessary;
(b) examine under oath any person in connection with the violation;
(c) examine any record, book, document, account, or paper as he considers necessary; and
(d) pursuant to an order of the circuit court, impound any record, book, document, account, paper, sample, or material relating to such practice and retain the same in his possession until the completion of all proceedings undertaken under this section or in the courts.

SECTION 3.This act takes effect upon approval by the Governor.
----XX----
This web page was last updated on December 15, 2022 at 03:15 PM





MISSISSIPPI LEGISLATURE
2023 Regular Session
To: Public Health and Human Services
By: Representative Eubanks
House Bill 1258
AN ACT TO PROHIBIT THE ADMINISTRATION OF OR THE ASSISTANCE IN
THE ADMINISTRATION OF CROSS SEX HORMONES OR PUBERTY BLOCKING DRUGS FOR PERSONS UNDER
TWENTY-ONE YEARS OF AGE; TO PROHIBIT THE PERFORMANCE OF GENDER REASSIGNMENT SURGERY;
TO PROHIBIT PHYSICIANS AND OTHER HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONALS FROM PROVIDING
GENDER TRANSITION PROCEDURES OR GENDER REASSIGNMENT SURGERY TO ANY PERSON UNDER
TWENTY-ONE YEARS OF AGE; TO PROHIBIT PHYSICIANS AND OTHER HEALTH CARE
PROFESSIONALS FROM REFERRING ANY PERSON UNDER A CERTAIN AGE TO ANY HEALTH CARE
PROFESSIONAL FOR GENDER TRANSITION OR GENDER REASSIGNMENT PROCEDURES; TO PROHIBIT
PARENTS, GUARDIANS OR PERSONS RESPONSIBLE FOR THE CARE OF A PERSON UNDER A CERTAIN
AGE FROM CONSENTING TO OR PROVIDING PUBERTY-BLOCKING DRUGS, CROSS SEX HORMONES;
TO PROVIDE FOR CERTAIN EXCEPTIONS TO THOSE PROHIBITIONS; TO AMEND SECTION 97-5-39,
MISSISSIPPI CODE OF 1972, TO INCLUDE VIOLATIONS OF THIS ACT IN THE PENALTIES FOR
CHILD ABUSE; TO AMEND SECTION 43-21-105, MISSISSIPPI CODE OF 1972, TO REVISE THE
DEFINITION OF CHILD ABUSE TO INCLUDE VIOLATION OF THIS ACT; TO AMEND SECTION 97-5-51,
MISSISSIPPI CODE OF 1972, TO REQUIRE MANDATORY REPORTING OF PERSONS WHO VIOLATE
THE PROVISIONS OF THIS ACT; TO PROHIBIT THE DIRECT OR INDIRECT USE, GRANT,
PAYMENT OR DISTRIBUTION OF PUBLIC FUNDS TO ANY ENTITY, ORGANIZATION OR
INDIVIDUAL THAT PROVIDES GENDER TRANSITION PROCEDURES TO A PERSON UNDER TWENTY-ONE
YEARS OF AGE; TO PROVIDE THAT HEALTH CARE SERVICES FURNISHED IN A STATE OR
LOCALLY-OWNED HEALTH CARE FACILITY OR BY A PHYSICIAN OR OTHER HEALTH CARE
PROFESSIONAL EMPLOYED BY THE STATE OR LOCAL GOVERNMENT SHALL NOT INCLUDE GENDER
TRANSITION PROCEDURES FOR A PERSON UNDER TWENTY-ONE YEARS OF AGE; TO PROVIDE
THAT AMOUNTS PAID DURING A TAXABLE YEAR FOR PROVISION OF GENDER TRANSITION
PROCEDURES OR AS PREMIUMS FOR HEALTH CARE COVERAGE THAT INCLUDES COVERAGE FOR
GENDER TRANSITION PROCEDURES ARE NOT DEDUCTIBLE UNDER THE STATE INCOME TAX
LAWS; TO PROVIDE THAT ANY REFERRAL FOR OR PROVISION OF GENDER TRANSITION PROCEDURES
TO A PERSON UNDER TWENTY-ONE YEARS OF AGE BY A PHYSICIAN OR OTHER HEALTH CARE
PROFESSIONAL IS UNPROFESSIONAL CONDUCT AND IS SUBJECT TO DISCIPLINE BY THE APPROPRIATE
LICENSING ENTITY FOR THE HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONAL; TO AUTHORIZE THE ATTORNEY
GENERAL TO BRING AN ACTION TO ENFORCE COMPLIANCE WITH THIS ACT; TO CREATE NEW
SECTION 43-13-117.7, MISSISSIPPI CODE OF 1972, TO PROHIBIT THE DIVISION OF
MEDICAID FROM REIMBURSING OR PROVIDING COVERAGE FOR GENDER TRANSITION
PROCEDURES FOR A PERSON UNDER TWENTY-ONE YEARS OF AGE; TO AMEND SECTION 83-9-22,
MISSISSIPPI CODE OF 1972, TO PROVIDE THAT GENDER TRANSITION PROCEDURES FOR PERSONS
UNDER TWENTY-ONE ARE NOT REQUIRED IN HEALTH COVERAGE PLANS; TO CREATE NEW
SECTION 83-9-37, MISSISSIPPI CODE OF 1972, TO PROVIDE THAT A HEALTH BENEFIT PLAN
UNDER AN INSURANCE POLICY OR OTHER PLAN PROVIDING HEALTH CARE COVERAGE SHALL
NOT INCLUDE REIMBURSEMENT FOR GENDER TRANSITION PROCEDURES FOR A PERSON UNDER TWENTY-ONE
YEARS OF AGE; TO AMEND SECTIONS 27-7-17, 73-15-29 AND 73-25-29, MISSISSIPPI
CODE OF 1972, TO CONFORM TO THE PROVISIONS OF THIS ACT; AND FOR RELATED
PURPOSES.
     BE IT ENACTED BY THE
LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF MISSISSIPPI:
     SECTION 1.  For
purposes of this act, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed
herein:
          (a)  "Biological
sex" means the biological indication of male and female in the context of
reproductive potential or capacity, such as sex chromosomes, naturally
occurring sex hormones, gonads, and nonambiguous internal and external
genitalia present at birth, without regard to an individual's psychological,
chosen, or subjective experience of gender;
          (b)  "Cross-sex
hormones" means:
               (i)  Testosterone
or other androgens given to biological females in amounts that are larger or
more potent than would normally occur naturally in healthy biological sex
females; and
               (ii)  Estrogen
given to biological males in amounts that are larger or more potent than would
normally occur naturally in healthy biological sex males;
          (c)  "Gender"
means the psychological, behavioral, social, and cultural aspects of being male
or female;
          (d)  "Gender
reassignment surgery" means any medical or surgical service that seeks to surgically
alter or remove healthy physical or anatomical characteristics or features that
are typical for the individual's biological sex, in order to instill or create
physiological or anatomical characteristics that resemble a sex different from
the individual's biological sex, including, without limitation, genital or
nongenital gender reassignment surgery performed for the purpose of assisting
an individual with a gender transition including, without limitation:
               (i)  Surgical
procedures such as penectomy, orchiectomy, vaginoplasty, clitoroplasty, or
vulvoplasty for biologically male patients or hysterectomy or ovariectomy for
biologically female patients;
               (ii)  Reconstruction
of the fixed part of the urethra with or without a metoidioplasty; 
               (iii)  Phalloplasty,
vaginectomy, scrotoplasty, or implantation of erection or testicular prostheses
for biologically female patients;
               (iv)  Surgical
procedures for biologically male patients, such as augmentation mammoplasty, facial
feminization surgery, liposuction, lipofilling, voice surgery, thyroid
cartilage reduction, gluteal augmentation, hair reconstruction, or various
aesthetic procedures; or
               (v)  Surgical procedures
for biologically female patients, such as subcutaneous mastectomy, voice
surgery, liposuction, lipofilling, pectoral implants, or various aesthetic
procedures;
          (e)  "Gender
transition" means the process in which a person goes from identifying with
and living as a gender that corresponds to his or her biological sex to
identifying with and living as a gender different from his or her biological
sex, and may involve social, legal, or physical changes;
          (f)  (i)  "Gender
transition procedures" means any medical or surgical service, including,
without limitation, physician's services, inpatient and outpatient hospital
services, or prescribed drugs related to gender transition that seek to:
                    1.  Alter or remove
physical or anatomical characteristics or features that are typical for the
individual's biological sex; or
                    2.  Instill
or create physiological or anatomical characteristics that resemble a sex
different from the individual's biological sex, including, without limitation,
medical services that provide puberty-blocking drugs, cross-sex hormones, or
other mechanisms to promote the development of feminizing or masculinizing
features in the opposite biological sex, or genital or nongenital gender reassignment
surgery performed for the purpose of assisting an individual with a gender
transition.
               (ii)  "Gender
transition procedures" do not include:
                    1.  Services
to persons born with a medically verifiable disorder of sex development, including
a person with external biological sex characteristics that are irresolvably
ambiguous, such as those born with forty-six (46) XX chromosomes with
virilization, forty-six (46) XY chromosomes with undervirilization, or having
both ovarian and testicular tissue;
                    2.  Services
provided when a physician has otherwise diagnosed a disorder of sexual
development that the physician has determined through genetic or biochemical
testing that the person does not have normal sex chromosome structure, sex steroid
hormone production, or sex steroid hormone action;
                    3.  The
treatment of any infection, injury, disease, or disorder that has been caused
by or exacerbated by the performance of gender transition procedures, whether
or not the gender transition procedure was performed in accordance with state
and federal law or whether or not the funding for the gender transition
procedure is permissible under this act; or
                    4.  Any
procedure undertaken because the individual suffers from a physical disorder,
physical injury, or physical illness that would, as certified by a physician,
place the individual in imminent danger of death or impairment of major bodily
function unless surgery is performed;
          (g)  "Health care
professional" means a person who is licensed, certified, or otherwise
authorized by the laws of this state to administer health care in the ordinary
course of the practice of his or her profession;
          (h)  "Physician"
means a person who is licensed to practice medicine in this state;
          (i)  "Puberty-blocking
drugs" means gonadotropin-releasing hormone analogues or other synthetic
drugs used in biological males to stop luteinizing hormone secretion and
therefore testosterone secretion, or synthetic drugs used in biological females
which stop the production of estrogens and progesterone, when used to delay or suppress
pubertal development in children for the purpose of assisting an individual
with a gender transition; and
          (j)  "Public funds"
means state, county, or local government monies, in addition to any department,
agency, or instrumentality authorized or appropriated under state law or
derived from any fund in which such monies are deposited.
     SECTION 2.  (1)
 (a)  No person may administer, supply, consent to, or assist in administering or
supplying a puberty-blocking drug or cross-sex hormone to a person under the age
of twenty-one (21) years of age.  
          (b)  No person shall perform
or provide, or assist in the performance or provision of gender transition procedures
or gender reassignment surgery to a person under the age of twenty-one (21) years
of age. 
          (c)  A physician or other health care professional shall not
provide gender transition procedures to any person under twenty-one (21) years
of age.
          (d)  A physician, or
other health care professional shall not refer any person under twenty-one (21)
years of age to any health care professional for gender transition procedures.
          (e)  Any person who violates
the prohibitions described in this section shall be guilty of the felony crime of
"gender disfigurement" and upon conviction, fined no less than Ten Thousand
Dollars ($10,000.00), sentenced up to five (5) years in the custody of the Department
of Corrections, or both. 
     (2)  A physician who violates
the prohibition in subsection (1) of this section shall have his or her license
to practice medicine in the State of Mississippi revoked pursuant to action taken
by the Mississippi State Board of Medical Licensure.
     (3)  For any claim accruing on
or after July 1, 2023, a private cause of action may be brought against a physician,
osteopath or hospital for injuries arising out of the course of medical, surgical
or other professional services related to the performance of gender reassignment
surgery or services.  
     (4)  For any claim accruing on
or after July 1, 2023, no claim as provided for in subsection (2) of this section
may be brought unless it is filed within five (5) years from the date the alleged
act occurred.
     (5)  If at the time at which
the cause of action arose, the person to whom such claim has accrued shall be twenty-one
(21) years of age or younger, then such minor or the person claiming through
such minor may, notwithstanding that the period of time limited pursuant to
subsection (3) of this section shall have expired, commence action on such
claim at any time within two (2) years next after the time at which the minor shall
have reached his or her twenty-first birthday, or shall have died, whichever
shall have first occurred.
     SECTION 3.  Section
97-5-39, Mississippi Code of 1972, is amended as follows:
     97-5-39.  (1)  (a)  Except
as otherwise provided in this section, any parent, guardian or other person who
intentionally, knowingly or recklessly commits any act or omits the performance
of any duty, which act or omission contributes to or tends to contribute to the
neglect or delinquency of any child or which act or omission results in the
abuse of any child, as defined in Section 43-21-105(m) of the Youth Court Law,
or who knowingly aids any child in escaping or absenting himself from the
guardianship or custody of any person, agency or institution, or knowingly harbors
or conceals, or aids in harboring or concealing, any child who has absented
himself without permission from the guardianship or custody of any person,
agency or institution to which the child shall have been committed by the youth
court shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be punished
by a fine not to exceed One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00), or by imprisonment
not to exceed one (1) year in jail, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
          (b)  For the purpose of
this section, a child is a person who has not reached his eighteenth birthday. 
A child who has not reached his eighteenth birthday and is on active duty for a
branch of the armed services, or who is married, is not considered a child for
the purposes of this statute.
          (c)  If a child commits
one (1) of the proscribed acts in subsection (2)(a), (b) or (c) of this section
upon another child, then original jurisdiction of all such offenses shall be in
youth court.
          (d)  If the child's
deprivation of necessary clothing, shelter, health care or supervision
appropriate to the child's age results in substantial harm to the child's
physical, mental or emotional health, the person may be sentenced to imprisonment
in custody of the Department of Corrections for not more than five (5) years or
to payment of a fine of not more than Five Thousand Dollars ($5,000.00), or
both.
          (e)  A parent, legal
guardian or other person who knowingly permits the continuing physical or sexual
abuse of a child is guilty of neglect of a child and may be sentenced to
imprisonment in the custody of the Department of Corrections for not more than
ten (10) years or to payment of a fine of not more than Ten Thousand Dollars
($10,000.00), or both.
     (2)  Any person shall be
guilty of felonious child abuse in the following circumstances: 
          (a)  Whether bodily
harm results or not, if the person shall intentionally, knowingly or
recklessly: 
              (i)  Burn any
child;
              (ii)  Physically torture
any child;
              (iii)  Strangle,
choke, smother or in any way interfere with any child's breathing;
              (iv)  Poison a
child;
              (v)  Starve a child
of nourishments needed to sustain life or growth;
              (vi)  Use any type
of deadly weapon upon any child;
          (b)  If some bodily
harm to any child actually occurs, and if the person shall intentionally,
knowingly or recklessly:
              (i)  Throw, kick,
bite, or cut any child;
              (ii)  Strike a
child under the age of fourteen (14) about the face or head with a closed fist;
              (iii)  Strike a
child under the age of five (5) in the face or head;
              (iv)  Kick, bite,
cut or strike a child's genitals; circumcision of a male child is not a
violation under this subparagraph (iv);
          (c)  If serious bodily
harm to any child actually occurs, and if the person shall intentionally,
knowingly or recklessly:
              (i)  Strike any
child on the face or head;
              (ii)  Disfigure or
scar any child;
              (iii)  Whip, strike
or otherwise abuse any child;
          (d)  If the person violates
subsection (1) of Section 2 of this act.
          ( * * *de)  Any person, upon conviction under
paragraph (a) or (c) of this subsection, shall be sentenced by the court to
imprisonment in the custody of the Department of Corrections for a term of not
less than five (5) years and up to life, as determined by the court.  Any person,
upon conviction under paragraph (b) or (d) of this subsection shall be
sentenced by the court to imprisonment in the custody of the Department of
Corrections for a term of not less than two (2) years nor more than ten (10)
years, as determined by the court.  For any second or subsequent conviction
under this subsection (2), the person shall be sentenced to imprisonment for
life.
          ( * * *ef)  For the purposes of this subsection
(2), "bodily harm" means any bodily injury to a child and includes,
but is not limited to, bruising, bleeding, lacerations, soft tissue swelling,
and external or internal swelling of any body organ.
          ( * * *fg)  For the purposes of this subsection
(2), "serious bodily harm" means any serious bodily injury to a child
and includes, but is not limited to, the fracture of a bone, permanent
disfigurement, permanent scarring, or any internal bleeding or internal trauma
to any organ, any brain damage, the removal of genitals from the child's body
in violation of paragraph (d) of this subsection, or implant of genitals to the
child's body in violation of paragraph (d) of this subsection, any injury
to the eye or ear of a child or other vital organ, and impairment of any bodily
function. 
          ( * * *gh)  Nothing contained in paragraph (c) of
this subsection shall preclude a parent or guardian from disciplining a child
of that parent or guardian, or shall preclude a person in loco parentis to a
child from disciplining that child, if done in a reasonable manner, and
reasonable corporal punishment or reasonable discipline as to that parent or
guardian's child or child to whom a person stands in loco parentis shall be a
defense to any violation charged under paragraph (c) of this subsection.
          ( * * *hi)  Reasonable discipline and
reasonable corporal punishment shall not be a defense to acts described in
paragraphs (a) and (b) of this subsection or if a child suffers serious bodily
harm as a result of any act prohibited under paragraph (c) of this subsection.
     (3)  Nothing contained in
this section shall prevent proceedings against the parent, guardian or other
person under any statute of this state or any municipal ordinance defining any
act as a crime or misdemeanor.  Nothing in the provisions of this section shall
preclude any person from having a right to trial by jury when charged with
having violated the provisions of this section.
     (4)  (a)  A parent, legal
guardian or caretaker who endangers a child's person or health by knowingly causing
or permitting the child to be present where any person is selling, manufacturing
or possessing immediate precursors or chemical substances with intent to
manufacture, sell or possess a controlled substance as prohibited under Section
41-29-139 or 41-29-313, is guilty of child endangerment and may be sentenced to
imprisonment for not more than ten (10) years or to payment of a fine of not
more than Ten Thousand Dollars ($10,000.00), or both.
          (b)  If the
endangerment results in substantial harm to the child's physical, mental or
emotional health, the person may be sentenced to imprisonment for not more than
twenty (20) years or to payment of a fine of not more than Twenty Thousand
Dollars ($20,000.00), or both.
     (5)  Nothing contained in
this section shall prevent proceedings against the parent, guardian or other person
under any statute of this state or any municipal ordinance defining any act as
a crime or misdemeanor.  Nothing in the provisions of this section shall
preclude any person from having a right to trial by jury when charged with
having violated the provisions of this section.
     (6)  After consultation with
the Department of Human Services, a regional mental health center or an
appropriate professional person, a judge may suspend imposition or execution of
a sentence provided in subsections (1) and (2) of this section and in lieu
thereof require treatment over a specified period of time at any approved
public or private treatment facility.  A person may be eligible for treatment
in lieu of criminal penalties no more than one (1) time.
     (7)  In any proceeding
resulting from a report made pursuant to Section 43-21-353 of the Youth Court
Law, the testimony of the physician making the report regarding the child's
injuries or condition or cause thereof shall not be excluded on the ground that
the physician's testimony violates the physician-patient privilege or similar
privilege or rule against disclosure.  The physician's report shall not be
considered as evidence unless introduced as an exhibit to his testimony.
     (8)  Any criminal
prosecution arising from a violation of this section shall be tried in the
circuit, county, justice or municipal court having jurisdiction; provided,
however, that nothing herein shall abridge or dilute the contempt powers of the
youth court.
     SECTION 4.  Section
43-21-105, Mississippi Code of 1972, is amended as follows:
     43-21-105.  The following
words and phrases, for purposes of this chapter, shall have the meanings
ascribed herein unless the context clearly otherwise requires:
          (a)  "Youth
court" means the Youth Court Division.
          (b)  "Judge"
means the judge of the Youth Court Division.
          (c) 
"Designee" means any person that the judge appoints to perform a duty
which this chapter requires to be done by the judge or his designee.  The judge
may not appoint a person who is involved in law enforcement or who is an employee
of the Mississippi Department of Human Services or the Mississippi Department
of Child Protection Services to be his designee.
          (d)  "Child"
and "youth" are synonymous, and each means a person who has not reached
his eighteenth birthday.  A child who has not reached his eighteenth birthday
and is on active duty for a branch of the armed services or is married is not
considered a "child" or "youth" for the purposes of this chapter.
          (e)  "Parent"
means the father or mother to whom the child has been born, or the father or
mother by whom the child has been legally adopted.
          (f) 
"Guardian" means a court-appointed guardian of the person of a child.
          (g)  "Custodian"
means any person having the present care or custody of a child whether such
person be a parent or otherwise.
          (h)  "Legal
custodian" means a court-appointed custodian of the child.
          (i)  "Delinquent
child" means a child who has reached his tenth birthday and who has
committed a delinquent act.
          (j)  "Delinquent
act" is any act, which if committed by an adult, is designated as a crime
under state or federal law, or municipal or county ordinance other than
offenses punishable by life imprisonment or death.  A delinquent act includes
escape from lawful detention and violations of the Uniform Controlled
Substances Law and violent behavior.
          (k)  "Child in
need of supervision" means a child who has reached his seventh birthday
and is in need of treatment or rehabilitation because the child:
              (i)  Is habitually
disobedient of reasonable and lawful commands of his parent, guardian or
custodian and is ungovernable; or
              (ii)  While being
required to attend school, willfully and habitually violates the rules thereof
or willfully and habitually absents himself therefrom; or
               (iii)  Runs away
from home without good cause; or
              (iv)  Has committed
a delinquent act or acts.
          (l)  "Neglected
child" means a child:
              (i)  Whose parent,
guardian or custodian or any person responsible for his care or support,
neglects or refuses, when able so to do, to provide for him proper and
necessary care or support, or education as required by law, or medical,
surgical, or other care necessary for his well-being; however, a parent who
withholds medical treatment from any child who in good faith is under treatment
by spiritual means alone through prayer in accordance with the tenets and
practices of a recognized church or religious denomination by a duly accredited
practitioner thereof shall not, for that reason alone, be considered to be
neglectful under any provision of this chapter; or
              (ii)  Who is
otherwise without proper care, custody, supervision or support; or
              (iii)  Who, for any
reason, lacks the special care made necessary for him by reason of his mental
condition, whether the mental condition is having mental illness or having an
intellectual disability; or
              (iv)  Who, for any
reason, lacks the care necessary for his health, morals or well-being.
          (m)  "Abused
child" means a child whose parent, guardian or custodian or any person
responsible for his care or support, whether legally obligated to do so or not,
has caused or allowed to be caused, upon the child, sexual abuse, sexual
exploitation, commercial sexual exploitation, emotional abuse, mental injury,
nonaccidental physical injury, the administration, supply, consent to,
or assistance in administering or supplying a puberty-blocking drug or cross-sex
hormone, gender transition procedures or gender reassignment surgery or
other maltreatment.  However, physical discipline, including spanking,
performed on a child by a parent, guardian or custodian in a reasonable manner
shall not be deemed abuse under this section.  "Abused child" also
means a child who is or has been trafficked within the meaning of the Mississippi
Human Trafficking Act by any person, without regard to the relationship of the
person to the child.
          (n)  "Sexual
abuse" means obscene or pornographic photographing, filming or depiction of
children for commercial purposes, or the rape, molestation, incest, prostitution
or other such forms of sexual exploitation of children under circumstances
which indicate that the child's health or welfare is harmed or threatened.
          (o)  "A child in
need of special care" means a child with any mental or physical illness
that cannot be treated with the dispositional alternatives ordinarily available
to the youth court.
          (p)  A "dependent
child" means any child who is not a child in need of supervision, a
delinquent child, an abused child or a neglected child, and which child has been
voluntarily placed in the custody of the Department of Child Protection
Services by his parent, guardian or custodian.
          (q)  "Custody"
means the physical possession of the child by any person.
          (r)  "Legal custody"
means the legal status created by a court order which gives the legal custodian
the responsibilities of physical possession of the child and the duty to
provide him with food, shelter, education and reasonable medical care, all
subject to residual rights and responsibilities of the parent or guardian of
the person.
          (s) 
"Detention" means the care of children in physically restrictive
facilities.
          (t) 
"Shelter" means care of children in physically nonrestrictive
facilities.
          (u)  "Records
involving children" means any of the following from which the child can be
identified:
              (i)  All youth
court records as defined in Section 43-21-251;
              (ii)  All forensic
interviews conducted by a child advocacy center in abuse and neglect
investigations;
              (iii)  All law
enforcement records as defined in Section 43-21-255;
              (iv)  All agency
records as defined in Section 43-21-257; and
              (v)  All other
documents maintained by any representative of the state, county, municipality
or other public agency insofar as they relate to the apprehension, custody,
adjudication or disposition of a child who is the subject of a youth court
cause.
          (v)  "Any person
responsible for care or support" means the person who is providing for the
child at a given time.  This term shall include, but is not limited to, stepparents,
foster parents, relatives, nonlicensed babysitters or other similar persons
responsible for a child and staff of residential care facilities and group
homes that are licensed by the Department of Human Services or the Department
of Child Protection Services.
          (w)  The singular
includes the plural, the plural the singular and the masculine the feminine
when consistent with the intent of this chapter.
          (x)  "Out-of-home"
setting means the temporary supervision or care of children by the staff of licensed
day care centers, the staff of public, private and state schools, the staff of
juvenile detention facilities, the staff of unlicensed residential care
facilities and group homes and the staff of, or individuals representing, churches,
civic or social organizations.
          (y)  "Durable
legal custody" means the legal status created by a court order which gives
the durable legal custodian the responsibilities of physical possession of the
child and the duty to provide him with care, nurture, welfare, food, shelter,
education and reasonable medical care.  All these duties as enumerated are
subject to the residual rights and responsibilities of the natural parent(s) or
guardian(s) of the child or children.
          (z)  "Status
offense" means conduct subject to adjudication by the youth court that
would not be a crime if committed by an adult.
          (aa)  "Financially
able" means a parent or child who is ineligible for a court-appointed
attorney.
          (bb) 
"Assessment" means an individualized examination of a child to determine
the child's psychosocial needs and problems, including the type and extent of
any mental health, substance abuse or co-occurring mental health and substance
abuse disorders and recommendations for treatment.  The term includes, but is
not limited to, a drug and alcohol, psychological or psychiatric evaluation,
records review, clinical interview or the administration of a formal test and
instrument.
          (cc) 
"Screening" means a process, with or without the administration of a
formal instrument, that is designed to identify a child who is at increased
risk of having mental health, substance abuse or co-occurring mental health and
substance abuse disorders that warrant immediate attention, intervention or
more comprehensive assessment.
          (dd)  "Durable legal
relative guardianship" means the legal status created by a youth court
order that conveys the physical and legal custody of a child or children by
durable legal guardianship to a relative or fictive kin who is licensed as a
foster or resource parent.
          (ee) 
"Relative" means a person related to the child by affinity or
consanguinity within the third degree.
          (ff)  "Fictive
kin" means a person not related to the child legally or biologically but
who is considered a relative due to a significant, familial-like and ongoing
relationship with the child and family.
          (gg)  "Reasonable
efforts" means the exercise of reasonable care and due diligence by the
Department of Human Services, the Department of Child Protection Services, or
any other appropriate entity or person to use appropriate and available
services to prevent the unnecessary removal of the child from the home or
provide other services related to meeting the needs of the child and the
parents.
          (hh)  "Commercial
sexual exploitation" means any sexual act or crime of a sexual nature,
which is committed against a child for financial or economic gain, to obtain a
thing of value for quid pro quo exchange of property or for any other purpose.
     SECTION 5.  Section
97-5-51, Mississippi Code of 1972, is amended as follows:
     97-5-51.  (1)  Definitions. 
For the purposes of this section:
          (a)  "Sex crime
against a minor" means any offense under at least one (1) of the
following statutes when committed by an adult against a minor who is under the
age of sixteen (16):  
              (i)  Section 97-3-65
relating to rape; 
              (ii)  Section 97-3-71
relating to rape and assault with intent to ravish;
              (iii)  Section 97-3-95
relating to sexual battery;
              (iv)  Section 97-5-23
relating to the touching of a child, mentally defective or incapacitated person
or physically helpless person for lustful purposes;
              (v)  Section 97-5-41
relating to the carnal knowledge of a stepchild, adopted child or child of a
cohabiting partner;
              (vi)  Section 97-5-33
relating to exploitation of children;
              (vii)  Section 97-3-54.1(1)(c)
relating to procuring sexual servitude of a minor;
              (viii)  Section 43-47-18
relating to sexual abuse of a vulnerable person;
               (ix)  Section 97-1-7
relating to the attempt to commit any of the offenses listed in this subsection;

              (x)  Section 97-29-51
relating to procuring sexual services of a minor; * * *and
              (xi)  Section 43-47-18
and Section 43-47-19 relating to sexual battery abuse of a vulnerable person
who is a minor * * *.;
and
               (xii)  Subsection
(1) of Section 3 of this act.
          (b) 
"Mandatory reporter" means any of the following individuals
performing their occupational duties:  health care practitioner, clergy member,
teaching or child care provider, law enforcement officer, or commercial image processor.
          (c)  "Health care
practitioner" means any individual who provides health care services,
including a physician, surgeon, physical therapist, psychiatrist, psychologist,
medical resident, medical intern, hospital staff member, licensed nurse, midwife
and emergency medical technician or paramedic.
          (d)  "Clergy
member" means any priest, rabbi or duly ordained deacon or minister.
          (e)  "Teaching or
child care provider" means anyone who provides training or supervision of
a minor under the age of sixteen (16), including a teacher, teacher's aide,
principal or staff member of a public or private school, social worker,
probation officer, foster home parent, group home or other child care
institutional staff member, personnel of residential home facilities, a
licensed or unlicensed day care provider.
          (f)  "Commercial
image processor" means any person who, for compensation:  (i) develops
exposed photographic film into negatives, slides or prints; (ii) makes prints
from negatives or slides; or (iii) processes or stores
digital media or images from any digital process, including, but not
limited to, website applications, photography, live streaming of video,
posting, creation of power points or any other means of intellectual property
communication or media including conversion or manipulation of still shots or
video into a digital show stored on a photography site or a media storage site.
          (g) 
"Caretaker" means any person legally obligated to provide or secure
adequate care for a minor under the age of sixteen (16), including a parent,
guardian, tutor, legal custodian or foster home parent.
     (2)  (a)  Mandatory
reporter requirement.  A mandatory reporter shall make a report if it would
be reasonable for the mandatory reporter to suspect that a sex crime against a
minor has occurred.
          (b)  Failure to file a
mandatory report shall be punished as provided in this section.
          (c)  Reports made under
this section and the identity of the mandatory reporter are confidential except
when the court determines the testimony of the person reporting to be material
to a judicial proceeding or when the identity of the reporter is released to
law enforcement agencies and the appropriate prosecutor.  The identity of the
reporting party shall not be disclosed to anyone other than law enforcement or
prosecutors except under court order; violation of this requirement is a
misdemeanor.  Reports made under this section are for the purpose of criminal
investigation and prosecution only and information from these reports is not a public
record.  Disclosure of any information by the prosecutor shall conform to the
Mississippi Uniform Rules of Circuit and County Court Procedure.
          (d)  Any mandatory reporter
who makes a required report under this section or participates in a judicial
proceeding resulting from a mandatory report shall be presumed to be acting in good
faith.  Any person or institution reporting in good faith shall be immune from
any liability, civil or criminal, that might otherwise be incurred or imposed.
     (3)  (a)  Mandatory
reporting procedure.  A report required under subsection (2) must be made
immediately to the law enforcement agency in whose jurisdiction the reporter
believes the sex crime against the minor occurred.  Except as otherwise
provided in this subsection (3), a mandatory reporter may not delegate to any
other person the responsibility to report, but shall make the report
personally.
              (i)  The reporting
requirement under this subsection (3) is satisfied if a mandatory reporter in
good faith reports a suspected sex crime against a minor to the Department of
Child Protection Services under Section 43-21-353.
              (ii)  The reporting
requirement under this subsection (3) is satisfied if a mandatory reporter
reports a suspected sex crime against a minor by following a reporting
procedure that is imposed:
                   1.  By state
agency rule as part of licensure of any person or entity holding a state
license to provide services that include the treatment or education of abused
or neglected children; or
                   2.  By statute.
          (b)  Contents of the
report.  The report shall identify, to the extent known to the reporter,
the following:
              (i)  The name and
address of the minor victim;
              (ii)  The name and
address of the minor's caretaker;
              (iii)  Any other
pertinent information known to the reporter.
     (4)  A law enforcement
officer who receives a mandated report under this section shall file an
affidavit against the offender on behalf of the State of Mississippi if there
is probable cause to believe that the offender has committed a sex crime
against a minor.
     (5)  Collection of
forensic samples.  (a)  (i)  When an abortion is performed on a minor who
is less than fourteen (14) years of age at the time of the abortion procedure,
fetal tissue extracted during the abortion shall be collected in accordance
with rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this section if it would be
reasonable to suspect that the pregnancy being terminated is the result of a
sex crime against a minor.
              (ii)  When a minor
who is under sixteen (16) years of age gives birth to an infant, umbilical cord
blood shall be collected, if possible, in accordance with rules and regulations
adopted pursuant to this section if it would be reasonable to suspect that the
minor's pregnancy resulted from a sex crime against a minor.
              (iii)  It shall be
reasonable to suspect that a sex crime against a minor has occurred if the
mother of an infant was less than sixteen (16) years of age at the time of
conception and at least one (1) of the following conditions also applies:
                   1.  The mother
of the infant will not identify the father of the infant;
                   2.  The mother
of the infant lists the father of the infant as unknown;
                   3.  The person
the mother identifies as the father of the infant disputes his fatherhood;
                   4.  The person
the mother identifies as the father of the infant is twenty-one (21) years of
age or older; or
                   5.  The person
the mother identifies as the father is deceased.
          (b)  The State Medical
Examiner shall adopt rules and regulations consistent with Section 99-49-1 that
prescribe:
              (i)  The amount and
type of fetal tissue or umbilical cord blood to be collected pursuant to
this section;
              (ii)  Procedures
for the proper preservation of the tissue or blood for the purpose of DNA testing
and examination;
              (iii)  Procedures
for documenting the chain of custody of such tissue or blood for use as
evidence;
              (iv)  Procedures
for proper disposal of fetal tissue or umbilical cord blood collected
pursuant to this section;
              (v)  A uniform reporting
instrument mandated to be utilized, which shall include the complete residence
address and name of the parent or legal guardian of the minor who is the
subject of the report required under this subsection (5); and
              (vi)  Procedures
for communication with law enforcement agencies regarding evidence and
information obtained pursuant to this section.
     (6)  Penalties. 
(a)  A person who is convicted of a first offense under this section shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and fined not more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00).
          (b)  A person who is
convicted of a second offense under this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and fined not more than One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00), or
imprisoned for not more than thirty (30) days, or both.
          (c)  A person who is
convicted of a third or subsequent offense under this section shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor and fined not more than Five Thousand Dollars ($5,000.00), or
imprisoned for not more than one (1) year, or both.
     (7)  A health care practitioner
or health care facility shall be immune from any penalty, civil or
criminal, for good-faith compliance with any rules and regulations adopted
pursuant to this section.
     SECTION 6.  Prohibition
on use of public funds or tax deduction for gender transition procedures.  (1)
 Public funds shall not be directly or indirectly used,
granted, paid, or distributed to any entity, organization, or individual that
provides gender transition procedures to a person under eighteen (18) years of
age.
     (2)  Health
care services furnished in the following situations shall not include gender
transition procedures for a person under twenty-one (21) years of age:
          (a)  By or in a health care
facility owned by the state or a county or local government; or
          (b)  By a physician or
other health care professional employed by the state or a county or local
government.
     (3)  Any
amount paid by an individual or an entity during a taxable year for provision
of gender transition procedures or as premiums for health care coverage that
includes coverage for gender transition procedures is not deductible under the state
income tax laws.
     SECTION 7.  Enforcement.
 (1)  Any referral for or provision of gender transition
procedures to a person under twenty-one (21) years of age by a physician or other
health care professional is unprofessional conduct and is subject to discipline
by the appropriate licensing entity for the health care professional.
     (2)  A person may assert an
actual or threatened violation of this act as a claim or defense in a judicial or
administrative proceeding and obtain compensatory damages, injunctive relief,
declaratory relief, or any other appropriate relief.
     (3)  (a)  A person must
bring a claim for a violation of this act no later than two (2) years after the
day the cause of action accrues.
          (b)  A person under twenty-one
(21) years of age may bring an action throughout their minority through a
parent or next friend, and may bring an action in their own name upon reaching
majority at any time from that point until twenty (20) years after reaching the
age of majority.
     (4)  Notwithstanding any
other provision of law, an action under this act may be commenced, and relief
may be granted, in a judicial proceeding without regard to whether the person
commencing the action has sought or exhausted available administrative remedies.
     (5)  In any action or
proceeding to enforce a provision of this act, a prevailing party who
establishes a violation of this act shall recover reasonable attorney's fees.
     (6)  (a)  The Attorney General may bring an action to enforce
compliance with this act.
          (b)  This act does not
deny, impair, or otherwise affect any right or authority of the Attorney
General, the State of Mississippi, or any agency, officer, or employee of the
state, acting under any law other than this act, to institute or intervene in
any proceeding.
     SECTION 8.  Section
27-7-17, Mississippi Code of 1972, is amended as follows:
     27-7-17.  In computing taxable
income, there shall be allowed as deductions:
     (1)  Business deductions.
          (a)  Business expenses. 
All the ordinary and necessary expenses paid or incurred during the taxable year
in carrying on any trade or business, including a reasonable allowance for salaries
or other compensation for personal services actually rendered; nonreimbursable traveling
expenses incident to current employment, including a reasonable amount expended
for meals and lodging while away from home in the pursuit of a trade or business;
and rentals or other payments required to be made as a condition of the continued
use or possession, for purposes of the trade or business of property to which the
taxpayer has not taken or is not taking title or in which he had no equity.  Expense
incurred in connection with earning and distributing nontaxable income is not an
allowable deduction.  Limitations on entertainment expenses shall conform to the
provisions of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.  There shall also be allowed a
deduction for expenses as provided in Section 41-137-51.
          (b)  Interest.  All
interest paid or accrued during the taxable year on business indebtedness, except
interest upon the indebtedness for the purchase of tax-free bonds, or any stocks,
the dividends from which are nontaxable under the provisions of this article; provided,
however, in the case of securities dealers, interest payments or accruals on loans,
the proceeds of which are used to purchase tax-exempt securities, shall be deductible
if income from otherwise tax-free securities is reported as income.  Investment
interest expense shall be limited to investment income.  Interest expense incurred
for the purchase of treasury stock, to pay dividends, or incurred as a result of
an undercapitalized affiliated corporation may not be deducted unless an ordinary
and necessary business purpose can be established to the satisfaction of the commissioner. 
For the purposes of this paragraph, the phrase "interest upon the indebtedness
for the purchase of tax-free bonds" applies only to the indebtedness incurred
for the purpose of directly purchasing tax-free bonds and does not apply to any
other indebtedness incurred in the regular course of the taxpayer's business.  Any
corporation, association, organization or other entity taxable under Section 27-7-23(c)
shall allocate interest expense as provided in Section 27-7-23(c)(3)(I).
          (c)  Taxes.  Taxes
paid or accrued within the taxable year, except state and federal income taxes,
excise taxes based on or measured by net income, estate and inheritance taxes, gift
taxes, cigar and cigarette taxes, gasoline taxes, and sales and use taxes unless
incurred as an item of expense in a trade or business or in the production of taxable
income.  In the case of an individual, taxes permitted as an itemized deduction
under the provisions of subsection (3)(a) of this section are to be claimed thereunder.
          (d)  Business losses.
              (i)  Losses sustained
during the taxable year not compensated for by insurance or otherwise, if incurred
in trade or business, or nonbusiness transactions entered into for profit.
              (ii)  Limitations on
losses from passive activities and rental real estate shall conform to the provisions
of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
          (e)  Bad debts. 
Losses from debts ascertained to be worthless and charged off during the taxable
year, if sustained in the conduct of the regular trade or business of the taxpayer;
provided, that such losses shall be allowed only when the taxpayer has reported
as income, on the accrual basis, the amount of such debt or account.
          (f)  Depreciation. 
A reasonable allowance for exhaustion, wear and tear of property used in the trade
or business, or rental property, and depreciation upon buildings based upon their
reasonable value as of March 16, 1912, if acquired prior thereto, and upon cost
if acquired subsequent to that date.  In the case of new or used aircraft, equipment,
engines, or other parts and tools used for aviation, allowance for bonus depreciation
conforms with the federal bonus depreciation rates and reasonable allowance for
depreciation under this section is no less than one hundred percent (100%). 
          (g)  Depletion. 
In the case of mines, oil and gas wells, other natural deposits and timber, a reasonable
allowance for depletion and for depreciation of improvements, based upon cost, including
cost of development, not otherwise deducted, or fair market value as of March 16,
1912, if acquired prior to that date, such allowance to be made upon regulations
prescribed by the commissioner, with the approval of the Governor.
          (h)  Contributions or
gifts.  Except as otherwise provided in paragraph (p) of this subsection or
subsection (3)(a) of this section for individuals, contributions or gifts made by
corporations within the taxable year to corporations, organizations, associations
or institutions, including Community Chest funds, foundations and trusts created
solely and exclusively for religious, charitable, scientific or educational purposes,
or for the prevention of cruelty to children or animals, no part of the net earnings
of which inure to the benefit of any private stockholder or individual.  This deduction
shall be allowed in an amount not to exceed twenty percent (20%) of the net income. 
Such contributions or gifts shall be allowable as deductions only if verified under
rules and regulations prescribed by the commissioner, with the approval of the Governor. 
Contributions made in any form other than cash shall be allowed as a deduction,
subject to the limitations herein provided, in an amount equal to the actual market
value of the contributions at the time the contribution is actually made and consummated.
          (i)  Reserve funds -
insurance companies.  In the case of insurance companies the net additions required
by law to be made within the taxable year to reserve funds when such reserve funds
are maintained for the purpose of liquidating policies at maturity.
          (j)  Annuity income. 
The sums, other than dividends, paid within the taxpayer year on policy or annuity
contracts when such income has been included in gross income.
          (k)  Contributions to
employee pension plans.  Contributions made by an employer to a plan or a trust
forming part of a pension plan, stock bonus plan, disability or death-benefit plan,
or profit-sharing plan of such employer for the exclusive benefit of some or all
of his, their, or its employees, or their beneficiaries, shall be deductible from
his, their, or its income only to the extent that, and for the taxable year in which,
the contribution is deductible for federal income tax purposes under the Internal
Revenue Code of 1986 and any other provisions of similar purport in the Internal
Revenue Laws of the United States, and the rules, regulations, rulings and determinations
promulgated thereunder, provided that:
              (i)  The plan or trust
be irrevocable.
               (ii)  The plan or trust
constitute a part of a pension plan, stock bonus plan, disability or death-benefit
plan, or profit-sharing plan for the exclusive benefit of some or all of the employer's
employees and/or officers, or their beneficiaries, for the purpose of distributing
the corpus and income of the plan or trust to such employees and/or officers, or
their beneficiaries.
              (iii)  No part of the
corpus or income of the plan or trust can be used for purposes other than for the
exclusive benefit of employees and/or officers, or their beneficiaries.
     Contributions to all plans or
to all trusts of real or personal property (or real and personal property combined)
or to insured plans created under a retirement plan for which provision has been
made under the laws of the United States of America, making such contributions deductible
from income for federal income tax purposes, shall be deductible only to the same
extent under the Income Tax Laws of the State of Mississippi.
          (l)  Net operating loss
carrybacks and carryovers.  A net operating loss for any taxable year ending
after December 31, 1993, and taxable years thereafter, shall be a net operating
loss carryback to each of the three (3) taxable years preceding the taxable year
of the loss.  If the net operating loss for any taxable year is not exhausted by
carrybacks to the three (3) taxable years preceding the taxable year of the loss,
then there shall be a net operating loss carryover to each of the fifteen (15) taxable
years following the taxable year of the loss beginning with any taxable year after
December 31, 1991.
     For any taxable year ending after
December 31, 1997, the period for net operating loss carrybacks and net operating
loss carryovers shall be the same as those established by the Internal Revenue Code
and the rules, regulations, rulings and determinations promulgated thereunder as
in effect at the taxable year end or on December 31, 2000, whichever is earlier.
     A net operating loss for any
taxable year ending after December 31, 2001, and taxable years thereafter, shall
be a net operating loss carryback to each of the two (2) taxable years preceding
the taxable year of the loss.  If the net operating loss for any taxable year is
not exhausted by carrybacks to the two (2) taxable years preceding the taxable year
of the loss, then there shall be a net operating loss carryover to each of the twenty
(20) taxable years following the taxable year of the loss beginning with any taxable
year after the taxable year of the loss.
     The term "net operating
loss," for the purposes of this paragraph, shall be the excess of the deductions
allowed over the gross income; provided, however, the following deductions shall
not be allowed in computing same:
               (i)  No net operating
loss deduction shall be allowed.
              (ii)  No personal exemption
deduction shall be allowed.
              (iii)  Allowable deductions
which are not attributable to taxpayer's trade or business shall be allowed only
to the extent of the amount of gross income not derived from such trade or business.
     Any taxpayer entitled to a carryback
period as provided by this paragraph may elect to relinquish the entire carryback
period with respect to a net operating loss for any taxable year ending after December
31, 1991.  The election shall be made in the manner prescribed by the Department
of Revenue and shall be made by the due date, including extensions of time, for
filing the taxpayer's return for the taxable year of the net operating loss for
which the election is to be in effect.  The election, once made for any taxable
year, shall be irrevocable for that taxable year.
          (m)  Amortization of
pollution or environmental control facilities.  Allowance of deduction.  Every
taxpayer, at his election, shall be entitled to a deduction for pollution or environmental
control facilities to the same extent as that allowed under the Internal Revenue
Code and the rules, regulations, rulings and determinations promulgated thereunder.
          (n)  Dividend distributions
- real estate investment trusts.  "Real estate investment trust" (hereinafter
referred to as REIT) shall have the meaning ascribed to such term in Section 856
of the federal Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended.  A REIT is allowed a dividend
distributed deduction if the dividend distributions meet the requirements of Section
857 or are otherwise deductible under Section 858 or 860, federal Internal Revenue
Code of 1986, as amended.  In addition:
              (i)  A dividend distributed
deduction shall only be allowed for dividends paid by a publicly traded REIT.  A
qualified REIT subsidiary shall be allowed a dividend distributed deduction if its
owner is a publicly traded REIT.
              (ii)  Income generated
from real estate contributed or sold to a REIT by a shareholder or related party
shall not give rise to a dividend distributed deduction, unless the shareholder
or related party would have received the dividend distributed deduction under this
chapter.
              (iii)  A holding corporation
receiving a dividend from a REIT shall not be allowed the deduction in Section 27-7-15(4)(t).
              (iv)  Any REIT not allowed
the dividend distributed deduction in the federal Internal Revenue Code of 1986,
as amended, shall not be allowed a dividend distributed deduction under this chapter.
     The commissioner is authorized
to promulgate rules and regulations consistent with the provisions in Section 269
of the federal Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, so as to prevent the evasion
or avoidance of state income tax.
          (o)  Contributions to
college savings trust fund accounts.  Contributions or payments to a Mississippi
Affordable College Savings Program account are deductible as provided under Section
37-155-113.  Payments made under a prepaid tuition contract entered into under the
Mississippi Prepaid Affordable College Tuition Program are deductible as provided
under Section 37-155-17.
          (p)  Contributions of
human pharmaceutical products.  To the extent that a "major supplier"
as defined in Section 27-13-13(2)(d) contributes human pharmaceutical products in
excess of Two Hundred Fifty Million Dollars ($250,000,000.00) as determined under
Section 170 of the Internal Revenue Code, the charitable contribution limitation
associated with those donations shall follow the federal limitation but cannot result
in the Mississippi net income being reduced below zero.
          (q)  Contributions to
ABLE trust fund accounts.  Contributions or payments to a Mississippi Achieving
a Better Life Experience (ABLE) Program account are deductible as provided under
Section 43-28-13.
     (2)  Restrictions on the deductibility
of certain intangible expenses and interest expenses with a related member.
          (a)  As used in this subsection
(2):
              (i)  "Intangible
expenses and costs" include:
                   1.  Expenses, losses
and costs for, related to, or in connection directly or indirectly with the direct
or indirect acquisition, use, maintenance or management, ownership, sale, exchange
or any other disposition of intangible property to the extent such amounts are allowed
as deductions or costs in determining taxable income under this chapter;
                   2.  Expenses or
losses related to or incurred in connection directly or indirectly with factoring
transactions or discounting transactions;
                    3.  Royalty, patent,
technical and copyright fees;
                   4.  Licensing fees;
and 
                   5.  Other similar
expenses and costs.
               (ii)  "Intangible
property" means patents, patent applications, trade names, trademarks, service
marks, copyrights and similar types of intangible assets.
              (iii)  "Interest
expenses and cost" means amounts directly or indirectly allowed as deductions
for purposes of determining taxable income under this chapter to the extent such
interest expenses and costs are directly or indirectly for, related to, or in connection
with the direct or indirect acquisition, maintenance, management, ownership, sale,
exchange or disposition of intangible property.
              (iv)  "Related
member" means an entity or person that, with respect to the taxpayer during
all or any portion of the taxable year, is a related entity, a component member
as defined in the Internal Revenue Code, or is an entity or a person to or from
whom there is attribution of stock ownership in accordance with Section 1563(e)
of the Internal Revenue Code.
               (v)  "Related
entity" means:
                   1.  A stockholder
who is an individual or a member of the stockholder's family, as defined in regulations
prescribed by the commissioner, if the stockholder and the members of the stockholder's
family own, directly, indirectly, beneficially or constructively, in the aggregate,
at least fifty percent (50%) of the value of the taxpayer's outstanding stock;
                   2.  A stockholder,
or a stockholder's partnership, limited liability company, estate, trust or corporation,
if the stockholder and the stockholder's partnerships, limited liability companies,
estates, trusts and corporations own, directly, indirectly, beneficially or constructively,
in the aggregate, at least fifty percent (50%) of the value of the taxpayer's outstanding
stock;
                   3.  A corporation,
or a party related to the corporation in a manner that would require an attribution
of stock from the corporation to the party or from the party to the corporation,
if the taxpayer owns, directly, indirectly, beneficially or constructively, at least
fifty percent (50%) of the value of the corporation's outstanding stock under regulation
prescribed by the commissioner;
                   4.  Any entity
or person which would be a related member under this section if the taxpayer were
considered a corporation for purposes of this section.
          (b)  In computing net income,
a taxpayer shall add back otherwise deductible interest expenses and costs and intangible
expenses and costs directly or indirectly paid, accrued to or incurred, in connection
directly or indirectly with one or more direct or indirect transactions with one
or more related members.
          (c)  The adjustments required
by this subsection shall not apply to such portion of interest expenses and costs
and intangible expenses and costs that the taxpayer can establish meets one (1)
of the following:
              (i)  The related member
directly or indirectly paid, accrued or incurred such portion to a person during
the same income year who is not a related member; or
              (ii)  The transaction
giving rise to the interest expenses and costs or intangible expenses and costs
between the taxpayer and related member was done primarily for a valid business
purpose other than the avoidance of taxes, and the related member is not primarily
engaged in the acquisition, use, maintenance or management, ownership, sale, exchange
or any other disposition of intangible property.
          (d)  Nothing in this subsection
shall require a taxpayer to add to its net income more than once any amount of interest
expenses and costs or intangible expenses and costs that the taxpayer pays, accrues
or incurs to a related member.
          (e)  The commissioner may
prescribe such regulations as necessary or appropriate to carry out the purposes
of this subsection, including, but not limited to, clarifying definitions of terms,
rules of stock attribution, factoring and discount transactions.
     (3)  Individual nonbusiness
deductions.
          (a)  The amount allowable
for individual nonbusiness itemized deductions for federal income tax purposes where
the individual is eligible to elect, for the taxable year, to itemize deductions
on his federal return except the following:
              (i)  The deduction for
state income taxes paid or other taxes allowed for federal purposes in lieu of state
income taxes paid;
              (ii)  The deduction
for gaming losses from gaming establishments;
              (iii)  The deduction
for taxes collected by licensed gaming establishments pursuant to Section
27-7-901;
              (iv)  The deduction
for taxes collected by gaming establishments pursuant to Section 27-7-903 * * *.; and
               (v)  The deduction
for medical expenses for the provision of puberty-blocking drugs, cross-sex hormones,
gender transition procedures or gender reassignment surgery as defined in Section
2 of this act.
          (b)  In lieu of the individual
nonbusiness itemized deductions authorized in paragraph (a), for all purposes other
than ordinary and necessary expenses paid or incurred during the taxable year in
carrying on any trade or business, an optional standard deduction of:
              (i)  Three Thousand
Four Hundred Dollars ($3,400.00) through calendar year 1997, Four Thousand Two Hundred
Dollars ($4,200.00) for the calendar year 1998 and Four Thousand Six Hundred Dollars
($4,600.00) for each calendar year thereafter in the case of married individuals
filing a joint or combined return;
              (ii)  One Thousand Seven
Hundred Dollars ($1,700.00) through calendar year 1997, Two Thousand One Hundred
Dollars ($2,100.00) for the calendar year 1998 and Two Thousand Three Hundred Dollars
($2,300.00) for each calendar year thereafter in the case of married individuals
filing separate returns;
              (iii)  Three Thousand
Four Hundred Dollars ($3,400.00) in the case of a head of family; or
               (iv)  Two Thousand
Three Hundred Dollars ($2,300.00) in the case of an individual who is not married.
     In the case of a husband and
wife living together, having separate incomes, and filing combined returns, the
standard deduction authorized may be divided in any manner they choose.  In the
case of separate returns by a husband and wife, the standard deduction shall not
be allowed to either if the taxable income of one of the spouses is determined without
regard to the standard deduction.
          (c)  A nonresident individual
shall be allowed the same individual nonbusiness deductions as are authorized for
resident individuals in paragraph (a) or (b) of this subsection; however, the nonresident
individual is entitled only to that proportion of the individual nonbusiness deductions
as his net income from sources within the State of Mississippi bears to his total
or entire net income from all sources.
     (4)  Nothing in this section
shall permit the same item to be deducted more than once, either in fact or in effect.
     (5)  Notwithstanding
any other provision in Title 27, Mississippi Code of 1972, there shall be allowed
an income tax deduction for otherwise deductible expenses if:
          (a)  The payment(s) for
such deductible expenses are made with the grant or loan program of the Paycheck
Protection Program as authorized under (i) the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic
Security (CARES) Act and the Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2021, (ii) the COVID-19
Economic Injury Disaster Loan Program, (iii) the 2020 COVID-19 Mississippi Business
Assistance Act, (iv) the Rental Assistance Grant Program, (v) the Shuttered Venue
Operators Grant Program and Restaurant Revitalization Fund authorized by the Economic
Aid to Hard-Hit Small Businesses, Nonprofits, and Venues Act, and amended by the
federal American Rescue Plan Act, and/or (vi) the Mississippi Agriculture Stabilization
Act; and
          (b)  Such deductible expenses
shall be allowed as deductions for federal income tax purposes.
     SECTION 9.  The
following shall be codified as Section 43-13-117.7, Mississippi Code of 1972:
     43-13-117.7.  Notwithstanding
any other provisions of Section 43-13-117, the division
shall not reimburse or provide coverage for gender transition procedures for a person
under twenty-one (21) years of age.  As used in this section, the term "gender
transition procedures" means the same as defined in Section 3 of this act.
     SECTION 10.  Section
73-15-29, Mississippi Code of 1972, is amended as follows:
     73-15-29.  (1)  The board shall
have power to revoke, suspend or refuse to renew any license issued by the board,
or to revoke or suspend any privilege to practice, or to deny an application for
a license, or to fine, place on probation and/or discipline a licensee, in any manner
specified in this article, upon proof that such person:
          (a)  Has committed fraud
or deceit in securing or attempting to secure such license;
          (b)  Has been convicted
of a felony, or a crime involving moral turpitude or has had accepted by a court
a plea of nolo contendere to a felony or a crime involving moral turpitude (a certified
copy of the judgment of the court of competent jurisdiction of such conviction or
pleas shall be prima facie evidence of such conviction);
          (c)  Has negligently or
willfully acted in a manner inconsistent with the health or safety of the persons
under the licensee's care;
          (d)  Has had a license or
privilege to practice as a registered nurse or a licensed practical nurse suspended
or revoked in any jurisdiction, has voluntarily surrendered such license or privilege
to practice in any jurisdiction, has been placed on probation as a registered nurse
or licensed practical nurse in any jurisdiction or has been placed under a disciplinary
order(s) in any manner as a registered nurse or licensed practical nurse in any
jurisdiction, (a certified copy of the order of suspension, revocation, probation
or disciplinary action shall be prima facie evidence of such action);
          (e)  Has negligently or
willfully practiced nursing in a manner that fails to meet generally accepted standards
of such nursing practice;
          (f)  Has negligently or
willfully violated any order, rule or regulation of the board pertaining to nursing
practice or licensure;
          (g)  Has falsified or in
a repeatedly negligent manner made incorrect entries or failed to make essential
entries on records;
          (h)  Is addicted to or dependent
on alcohol or other habit-forming drugs or is a habitual user of narcotics, barbiturates,
amphetamines, hallucinogens, or other drugs having similar effect, or has misappropriated
any medication;
          (i)  Has a physical, mental
or emotional condition that renders the licensee unable to perform nursing services
or duties with reasonable skill and safety;
          (j)  Has engaged in any
other conduct, whether of the same or of a different character from that specified
in this article, that would constitute a crime as defined in Title 97 of the Mississippi
Code of 1972, as now or hereafter amended, and that relates to such person's employment
as a registered nurse or licensed practical nurse;
          (k)  Engages in conduct
likely to deceive, defraud or harm the public;
          (l)  Engages in any unprofessional
conduct as identified by the board in its rules;
          (m)  Has violated any provision
of this article; * * *or
          (n)  Violation(s) of the
provisions of Sections 41-121-1 through 41-121-9 relating to deceptive advertisement
by health care practitioners.  This paragraph shall stand repealed on July 1, 2025 * * *.; or
          (o)  Violation(s) of
any provision of Sections 1 through 6 of this act.
     (2)  When the board finds any
person unqualified because of any of the grounds set forth in subsection (1) of
this section, it may enter an order imposing one or more of the following penalties:
          (a)  Denying application
for a license or other authorization to practice nursing or practical nursing;
          (b)  Administering a reprimand;
          (c)  Suspending or restricting
the license or other authorization to practice as a registered nurse or licensed
practical nurse for up to two (2) years without review;
          (d)  Revoking the license
or other authorization to practice nursing or practical nursing;
          (e)  Requiring the disciplinee
to submit to care, counseling or treatment by persons and/or agencies approved or
designated by the board as a condition for initial, continued or renewed licensure
or other authorization to practice nursing or practical nursing;
          (f)  Requiring the disciplinee
to participate in a program of education prescribed by the board as a condition
for initial, continued or renewed licensure or other authorization to practice;
          (g)  Requiring the disciplinee
to practice under the supervision of a registered nurse for a specified period of
time; or
          (h)  Imposing a fine not
to exceed Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00).
     (3)  In addition to the grounds
specified in subsection (1) of this section, the board shall be authorized to suspend
the license or privilege to practice of any licensee for being out of compliance
with an order for support, as defined in Section 93-11-153.  The procedure for suspension
of a license or privilege to practice for being out of compliance with an order
for support, and the procedure for the reissuance or reinstatement of a license
or privilege to practice suspended for that purpose, and the payment of any fees
for the reissuance or reinstatement of a license or privilege to practice suspended
for that purpose, shall be governed by Section 93-11-157 or 93-11-163, as the case
may be.  If there is any conflict between any provision of Section 93-11-157 or
93-11-163 and any provision of this article, the provisions of Section 93-11-157
or 93-11-163, as the case may be, shall control.
     (4)  If the public health, safety
or welfare imperatively requires emergency action and the board incorporates a finding
to that effect in an order, the board may order summary suspension of a license
pending proceedings for revocation or other action.  These proceedings shall be
promptly instituted and determined by the board.
     (5)  The board may establish
by rule an alternative to discipline program for licensees who have an impairment
as a result of substance abuse or a mental health condition, which program shall
include at least the following components:
          (a)  Participation in the
program is voluntary with the licensee, and the licensee must enter the program
before the board holds a disciplinary action hearing regarding the licensee;
          (b)  The full cost of participation
in the program, including the cost of any care, counseling, treatment and/or education
received by the licensee, shall be borne by the licensee;
          (c)  All of the procedures
and records regarding the licensee's participation in the program shall be confidential,
shall not be disclosed and shall be exempt from the provisions of the Mississippi
Public Records Act of 1983; and
          (d)  A licensee may not
participate in the program more often than one (1) time during any period of five
(5) years or such longer period as set by the board.
     (6)  A nurse practitioner who
provides a written certification as authorized under the Mississippi Medical Cannabis
Act and in compliance with rules and regulations adopted thereunder shall not be
subject to any disciplinary action under this section solely due to providing the
written certification.
     SECTION 11.  Section
73-25-29, Mississippi Code of 1972, is amended as follows:
     73-25-29.  The grounds for the
nonissuance, suspension, revocation or restriction of a license or the denial of
reinstatement or renewal of a license are:
          (1)  Habitual personal use
of narcotic drugs, or any other drug having addiction-forming or addiction-sustaining
liability.
          (2)  Habitual use of intoxicating
liquors, or any beverage, to an extent which affects professional competency.
          (3)  Administering, dispensing
or prescribing any narcotic drug, or any other drug having addiction-forming or
addiction-sustaining liability otherwise than in the course of legitimate professional
practice.
          (4)  Conviction of violation
of any federal or state law regulating the possession, distribution or use of any
narcotic drug or any drug considered a controlled substance under state or federal
law, a certified copy of the conviction order or judgment rendered by the trial
court being prima facie evidence thereof, notwithstanding the pendency of any appeal.
          (5)  Procuring, or attempting
to procure, or aiding in, an abortion that is not medically indicated.
          (6)  Conviction of a felony
or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, a certified copy of the conviction order
or judgment rendered by the trial court being prima facie evidence thereof, notwithstanding
the pendency of any appeal.
          (7)  Obtaining or attempting
to obtain a license by fraud or deception.
          (8)  Unprofessional conduct,
which includes, but is not limited to:
              (a)  Practicing medicine
under a false or assumed name or impersonating another practitioner, living or dead.
              (b)  Knowingly performing
any act which in any way assists an unlicensed person to practice medicine.
               (c)  Making or willfully
causing to be made any flamboyant claims concerning the licensee's professional
excellence.
              (d)  Being guilty of
any dishonorable or unethical conduct likely to deceive, defraud or harm the public.
              (e)  Obtaining a fee
as personal compensation or gain from a person on fraudulent representation of a
disease or injury condition generally considered incurable by competent medical
authority in the light of current scientific knowledge and practice can be cured
or offering, undertaking, attempting or agreeing to cure or treat the same by a
secret method, which he refuses to divulge to the board upon request.
              (f)  Use of any false,
fraudulent or forged statement or document, or the use of any fraudulent, deceitful,
dishonest or immoral practice in connection with any of the licensing requirements,
including the signing in his professional capacity any certificate that is known
to be false at the time he makes or signs such certificate.
              (g)  Failing to identify
a physician's school of practice in all professional uses of his name by use of
his earned degree or a description of his school of practice.
          (9)  The refusal of a licensing
authority of another state or jurisdiction to issue or renew a license, permit or
certificate to practice medicine in that jurisdiction or the revocation, suspension
or other restriction imposed on a license, permit or certificate issued by such
licensing authority which prevents or restricts practice in that jurisdiction, a
certified copy of the disciplinary order or action taken by the other state or jurisdiction
being prima facie evidence thereof, notwithstanding the pendency of any appeal.
          (10)  Surrender of a license
or authorization to practice medicine in another state or jurisdiction or surrender
of membership on any medical staff or in any medical or professional association
or society while under disciplinary investigation by any of those authorities or
bodies for acts or conduct similar to acts or conduct which would constitute grounds
for action as defined in this section.
          (11)  Final sanctions imposed
by the United States Department of Health and Human Services, Office of Inspector
General or any successor federal agency or office, based upon a finding of incompetency,
gross misconduct or failure to meet professionally recognized standards of health
care; a certified copy of the notice of final sanction being prima facie evidence
thereof.  As used in this paragraph, the term "final sanction" means the
written notice to a physician from the United States Department of Health and Human
Services, Officer of Inspector General or any successor federal agency or office,
which implements the exclusion.
          (12)  Failure to furnish
the board, its investigators or representatives information legally requested by
the board.
          (13)  Violation of any provision(s)
of the Medical Practice Act or the rules and regulations of the board or of any
order, stipulation or agreement with the board.
          (14)  Violation(s) of the
provisions of Sections 41-121-1 through 41-121-9 relating to deceptive advertisement
by health care practitioners.
          (15)  Performing or inducing
an abortion on a woman in violation of any provision of Sections 41-41-131 through
41-41-145.
          (16)  Performing an abortion
on a pregnant woman after determining that the unborn human individual that the
pregnant woman is carrying has a detectable fetal heartbeat as provided in Section
41-41-34.1.
          (17)  Violation(s) of
any provision of Sections 1 through 6 of this act.
     In addition to the grounds specified
above, the board shall be authorized to suspend the license of any licensee for
being out of compliance with an order for support, as defined in Section 93-11-153. 
The procedure for suspension of a license for being out of compliance with an order
for support, and the procedure for the reissuance or reinstatement of a license
suspended for that purpose, and the payment of any fees for the reissuance or reinstatement
of a license suspended for that purpose, shall be governed by Section 93-11-157
or 93-11-163, as the case may be.  If there is any conflict between any provision
of Section 93-11-157 or 93-11-163 and any provision of this chapter, the provisions
of Section 93-11-157 or 93-11-163, as the case may be, shall control. 
     A physician who provides a written
certification as authorized under the Mississippi Medical Cannabis Act and in compliance
with rules and regulations adopted thereunder shall not be subject to any disciplinary
action under this section solely due to providing the written certification.
     SECTION 12.  Section
83-9-22, Mississippi Code of 1972, is amended as follows:
     83-9-22.  (1)  (a)  Notwithstanding
any other provision of the law to the contrary, except as otherwise provided in
subsections (3) and (4) of this section, no health coverage plan shall
restrict coverage for medically appropriate treatment prescribed by a physician
and agreed to by a fully informed insured, or if the insured lacks legal capacity
to consent by a person who has legal authority to consent on his or her behalf,
based on an insured's diagnosis with a terminal condition.  Refusing to pay for
treatment rendered to an insured near the end of life that is consistent with best
practices for treatment of a disease or condition, approved uses of a drug or device,
or uses supported by peer reviewed medical literature, is a per se violation of
this section.
          (b)  Violations of this
section shall constitute an unfair trade practice and subject the violator to the
penalties provided by law.
          (c)  As used in this section
"terminal condition" means any aggressive malignancy, chronic end-stage
cardiovascular or cerebral vascular disease, or any other disease, illness or condition
which a physician diagnoses as terminal.
          (d)  As used in this section,
a "health coverage plan" shall mean any hospital, health or medical expense
insurance policy, hospital or medical service contract, employee welfare benefit
plan, contract or agreement with a health maintenance organization or a preferred
provider organization, health and accident insurance policy, or any other insurance
contract of this type, including a group insurance plan and the State Health and
Life Insurance Plan.
     (2)  (a)  Notwithstanding any
other provision of the law to the contrary, no health benefit paid directly or indirectly
with state funds, specifically Medicaid, shall restrict coverage for medically appropriate
treatment prescribed by a physician and agreed to by a fully informed individual,
or if the individual lacks legal capacity to consent by a person who has legal authority
to consent on his or her behalf, based on an individual's diagnosis with a terminal
condition.
          (b)  Refusing to pay for
treatment rendered to an individual near the end of life that is consistent with
best practices for treatment of a disease or condition, approved uses of a drug
or device, or uses supported by peer reviewed medical literature, is a per se violation
of this section.
          (c)  As used in this section
"terminal condition" means any aggressive malignancy, chronic end-stage
cardiovascular or cerebral vascular disease, or any other disease, illness or condition
which a physician diagnoses as terminal. 
     (3)  This section does not require
a health coverage plan to cover and pay for the treatment of a person who is a cardholder
and registered qualifying patient with medical cannabis that is lawful under the
Mississippi Medical Cannabis Act and in compliance with rules and regulations adopted
thereunder.
     (4)  This section does not
require a health coverage plan to provide coverage for gender transition
procedures for a person under twenty-one (21) years of age.  As used in this
section, the term "gender transition procedures" means the same as
defined in Section 3 of this act.
     SECTION 13.  The
following shall be codified as Section 83-9-37, Mississippi Code of 1972:
     83-9-37.  (1)  As used in this section, the term "gender transition
procedures" means the same as defined in Section 3 of this act.
     (2)  A
health benefit plan under an insurance policy or other plan providing health care
coverage in this state shall not include reimbursement for gender transition procedures
for a person under twenty-one (21) years of age.
     (3)  A health benefit plan
under an insurance policy or other plan providing health care coverage in this
state is not required to provide coverage for gender transition procedures for
a person under twenty-one (21) years of age.
     SECTION 14.  This act
shall take effect and be in force from and after July 1, 2023.






MISSISSIPPI LEGISLATURE
2023 Regular Session
To: Judiciary A
By: Representative Hobgood-Wilkes
House Bill 1144
AN ACT TO CREATE THE TITLE IX PRESERVATION ACT; TO STATE
LEGISLATIVE INTENT; TO PROVIDE INTERPRETATION AND CLARIFICATION OF CERTAIN TERMS
RELATING TO TITLE IX OF THE FEDERAL CODE; TO CLARIFY TERMS FOR THE PURPOSES OF STATE
LAW; TO PROVIDE THAT POLICIES AND LAWS THAT DISTINGUISH BETWEEN THE SEXES ARE
SUBJECT TO INTERMEDIATE CONSTITUTIONAL SCRUTINY; TO REQUIRE ANY PUBLIC SCHOOL,
SCHOOL DISTRICT, STATE OR LOCAL AGENCY, DEPARTMENT, OR OFFICE THAT COLLECTS
VITAL STATISTICS FOR THE PURPOSE OF COMPLYING WITH ANTI-DISCRIMINATION LAWS OR
FOR THE PURPOSE OF GATHERING ACCURATE PUBLIC HEALTH, CRIME, ECONOMIC OR OTHER
DATA TO IDENTIFY EACH INDIVIDUAL WHO IS PART OF THE COLLECTED DATA SET AS
EITHER MALE OR FEMALE AT BIRTH; AND FOR RELATED PURPOSES.
     BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE
OF THE STATE OF MISSISSIPPI:
     SECTION 1.  This
act shall be known and may be cited as "Title IX Preservation Act."
     SECTION 2.  The
Legislature finds that: 
          (a) Males and females
possess unique and immutable biological differences that manifest prior to
birth and increase as they age and experience puberty;
          (b)  Biological
differences between the sexes means that only females are able to get pregnant,
give birth, and breastfeed children;
          (c) Biological
differences between the sexes means that males are, on average, bigger,
stronger, and faster than females;
          (d) Biological
differences between the sexes leave females more physically vulnerable than
males to specific forms of violence, including sexual violence;
          (e) Females have
historically suffered from discrimination in education, athletics, and
employment;
          (f) Biological
differences between the sexes are enduring and may, in some circumstances,
warrant the creation of separate social, educational, athletic, or other spaces
in order to ensure safety and/or to allow members of each sex to succeed and
thrive; and 
          (g) Inconsistencies in
court rulings and policy initiatives with respect to the definitions of "sex,"
"male," "female," "man," and "woman"
have led to endangerment of single-sex spaces and resources, thereby necessitating
clarification of certain terms.
     SECTION 3.  For
purposes of state law:
          (a) A person's "sex"
is defined as his or her biological sex, either male or female, at birth;
          (b) A "female"
is an individual whose biological reproductive system is developed to produce
ova; a "male" is an individual whose biological reproductive system
is developed to fertilize the ova of a female;
          (c) "Woman"
and "girl" refer to human females, and the terms "man" and "boy"
refer to human males;
          (d)  The word "mother"
is defined as a parent of the female sex and "father" is defined as a
parent of the male sex;
          (e)  When it comes to
sex, "equal" does not mean "same" or "identical";
and
          (f) When it comes to
sex, separate is not inherently unequal.
     SECTION 4.  There
are legitimate reasons to distinguish between the sexes with respect to
athletics, prisons or other detention facilities, domestic violence shelters,
rape crisis centers, locker rooms, restrooms, and other areas where biology,
safety, and/or privacy are implicated.
     SECTION 5.  Policies
and laws that distinguish between the sexes are subject to intermediate
constitutional scrutiny, which forbids unfair discrimination against similarly-situated
males and females but allows the law to distinguish between the sexes where
such distinctions are substantially related to important governmental
objectives.
     SECTION 6.  Any
public school or school district and any state or local agency, department, or
office that collects vital statistics for the purpose of complying with anti-discrimination
laws or for the purpose of gathering accurate public health, crime, economic or
other data shall identify each individual who is part of the collected data set
as either male or female at birth.
     SECTION 7.  This act
shall take effect and be in force from and after July 1, 2023.




 
2023S0054-T  01/23/23


 


 

		By: Middleton
S.B. No. 649




 



 		
			

A BILL TO BE ENTITLED




 
			

AN ACT




 
			
relating to participation in athletic activities based on 



 
			
biological sex; providing a civil right to action for K-12 athletes 



 
			
and college athletes.



 
			
       BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF TEXAS:



 
			
       SECTION 1.  SHORT TITLE.  This Act may be cited as the Save 



 
			
Women's Sports Act.



 
			
       SECTION 2.  The heading to Section 33.0834, Education Code, 



 
			
is amended to read as follows:



 
			
       Sec. 33.0834.  [INTERSCHOLASTIC] ATHLETIC PARTICIPATION



 
			
[COMPETITION] BASED ON BIOLOGICAL SEX.



 
			
       SECTION 3.  Section 33.0834, Education Code, is amended by 



 
			
amending Subsections (a) and (b) and adding Subsections (e), (f), 



 
			
and (g) to read as follows:



 
			
       (a)  Except as provided by Subsection (b), an 



 
			
[interscholastic] athletic team or sport sponsored or authorized by 



 
			
a school district, [or] open-enrollment charter school, or any 



 
			
private school that competes against a public school may not allow a 



 
			
student to participate [compete] in an [interscholastic] athletic 



 
			
team or sport [competition] sponsored or authorized by the district 



 
			
or school that is designated for the biological sex opposite to the 



 
			
student's biological sex as correctly stated on:



 
			
             (1)  the student's official birth certificate, as 



 
			
described by Subsection (c); or



 
			
             (2)  if the student's official birth certificate 



 
			
described by Subdivision (1) is unobtainable, another government 



 
			
record that accurately states the student's biological sex.



 
			
       (b)  An [interscholastic] athletic team or sport described 



 
			
by Subsection (a) may allow a female student to participate



 
			
[compete] in an [interscholastic] athletic team or sport



 
			
[competition] that is designated for male students if a 



 
			
corresponding [interscholastic] athletic team or sport



 
			
[competition] designated for female students is not offered or 



 
			
available.



 
			
       (e)  A student shall have a private cause of action for 



 
			
injunctive relief, damages, attorney's fees and costs, and any 



 
			
other relief available under law if the student is:



 
			
             (1)  deprived of an athletic opportunity or suffers any 



 
			
direct or indirect harm as a result of a school district, charter 



 
			
school, or private school knowingly violating this Act; or



 
			
             (2)  subject to retaliation or other adverse action by 



 
			
a school district, charter school, private school, the University 



 
			
Interscholastic League, or any athletic association or 



 
			
organization as a result of reporting a violation of this Act.



 
			
       (f)  Sovereign immunity, governmental immunity, official 



 
			
immunity, and qualified immunity are waived and abrogated and may 



 
			
not be asserted as a defense in any action brought under Subsection 



 
			
(e).



 
			
       (g)  Notwithstanding any other law, the requirements and 



 
			
provisions of this section prevail over any conflicting or 



 
			
potentially conflicting statute, and no statute may be construed to 



 
			
repeal the requirements or provisions of this section in whole or in 



 
			
part, either expressly or by implication, unless the repealing 



 
			
statute explicitly states that it is repealing a requirement or 



 
			
provision of this section.



 
			
       SECTION 4.  Subchapter Z, Chapter 51, Education Code, is 



 
			
amended by adding Section 51.982 to read as follows:



 
			
       Sec. 51.982.  ATHLETIC PARTICIPATION BASED ON BIOLOGICAL 



 
			
SEX.  (a)  Except as provided by Subsection (b), an athletic team or 



 
			
sport sponsored or authorized by a public institution of higher 



 
			
education, public junior college, or any private institution or 



 
			
private junior college that competes against a public institution 



 
			
or public junior college may not allow a student to participate in 



 
			
an athletic team or sport sponsored or authorized by the 



 
			
institution of higher education or junior college that is 



 
			
designated for the biological sex opposite to the student's 



 
			
biological sex as correctly stated on:



 
			
             (1)  the student's official birth certificate, as 



 
			
described by Subsection (c); or



 
			
             (2)  if the student's official birth certificate 



 
			
described by Subdivision (1) is unobtainable, another government 



 
			
record that accurately states the student's biological sex.



 
			
       (b)  An athletic team or sport described by Subsection (a) 



 
			
may allow a female student to participate in an athletic team or 



 
			
sport that is designated for male students if a corresponding 



 
			
athletic team or sport designated for female students is not 



 
			
offered or available.



 
			
       (c)  For purposes of this section, a statement of a student's 



 
			
biological sex on the student's official birth certificate is 



 
			
considered to have correctly stated the student's biological sex 



 
			
only if the statement was:



 
			
             (1)  entered at or near the time of the student's birth; 



 
			
or



 
			
             (2)  modified to correct any type of scrivener or 



 
			
clerical error in the student's biological sex.



 
			
       (d)  A student shall have a private cause of action for 



 
			
injunctive relief, damages, attorney's fees and costs, and any 



 
			
other relief available under law if the student is:



 
			
             (1)  deprived of an athletic opportunity or suffers any 



 
			
direct or indirect harm as a result of an institution of higher 



 
			
education or junior college knowingly violating this Act; or



 
			
             (2)  subject to retaliation or other adverse action by 



 
			
an institution of higher education, junior college, or any athletic 



 
			
association or organization as a result of reporting a violation of 



 
			
this Act.



 
			
       (e)  Sovereign immunity, governmental immunity, official 



 
			
immunity, and qualified immunity are waived and abrogated and may 



 
			
not be asserted as a defense in any action brought under Subsection 



 
			
(d).



 
			
       (f)  Notwithstanding any other law, the requirements and 



 
			
provisions of this section prevail over any conflicting or 



 
			
potentially conflicting statute, and no statute may be construed to 



 
			
repeal the requirements or provisions of this section in whole or in 



 
			
part, either expressly or by implication, unless the repealing 



 
			
statute explicitly states that it is repealing a requirement or 



 
			
provision of this section.



 
			
       SECTION 5.  Chapter 30, Civil Practice and Remedies Code, is 



 
			
amended by adding Section 30.023 to read as follows:



 
			
       Sec. 30.023.  AWARD OF ATTORNEY'S FEES IN ACTIONS 



 
			
CHALLENGING CERTAIN EDUCATION LAWS.  (a)  Notwithstanding any other 



 
			
law, any person, including an entity, attorney, or law firm, who 



 
			
seeks declaratory or injunctive relief to prevent this state, a 



 
			
political subdivision, any governmental entity or public official 



 
			
in this state, or any person in this state from enforcing any 



 
			
statute, ordinance, rule, regulation, or any other type of law that 



 
			
regulates athletic participation based on biological sex in any 



 
			
state or federal court, or that represents any litigant seeking 



 
			
such relief in any state or federal court, is jointly and severally 



 
			
liable to pay the costs and reasonable attorney's fees of the 



 
			
prevailing party, including the costs and reasonable attorney's 



 
			
fees that the prevailing party incurs in its efforts to recover 



 
			
costs and fees.



 
			
       (b)  For purposes of this section, a party is considered a 



 
			
prevailing party if a state or federal court:



 
			
             (1)  dismisses any claim or cause of action brought 



 
			
against the party that seeks the declaratory or injunctive relief 



 
			
described by Subsection (a), regardless of the reason for the 



 
			
dismissal; or



 
			
             (2)  enters judgment in the party's favor on any such 



 
			
claim or cause of action.



 
			
       (c)  A prevailing party may recover costs and attorney's fees 



 
			
under this section only to the extent that those costs and 



 
			
attorney's fees were incurred while defending claims or causes of 



 
			
action on which the party prevailed.



 
			
       (d)  Regardless of whether a prevailing party sought to 



 
			
recover costs or attorney's fees in the underlying action, a 



 
			
prevailing party under this section may bring a civil action to 



 
			
recover costs and attorney's fees against a person, including an 



 
			
entity, attorney, or law firm, that sought declaratory or 



 
			
injunctive relief described by Subsection (a) not later than the 



 
			
third anniversary of the date on which, as applicable:



 
			
             (1)  the dismissal or judgment described by Subsection 



 
			
(b) becomes final on the conclusion of appellate review; or



 
			
             (2)  the time for seeking appellate review expires.



 
			
       (e)  It is not a defense to an action brought under 



 
			
Subsection (d) that:



 
			
             (1)  a prevailing party under this section failed to 



 
			
seek recovery of costs or attorney's fees in the underlying action;



 
			
             (2)  the court in the underlying action declined to 



 
			
recognize or enforce the requirements of this section; or



 
			
             (3)  the court in the underlying action held that any 



 
			
provisions of this section are invalid, unconstitutional, or 



 
			
preempted by federal law, notwithstanding the doctrines of issue or 



 
			
claim preclusion.



 
			
       (f)  Notwithstanding any other law, including Chapter 15, 



 
			
Civil Practice and Remedies Code, a civil action brought under 



 
			
Subsection (d) may be brought in:



 
			
             (1)  the county in which all or a substantial part of 



 
			
the events or omissions giving rise to the claim occurred;



 
			
             (2)  the county of residence for any one of the natural 



 
			
person defendants at the time the cause of action accrued;



 
			
             (3)  the county of the principal office in this state of 



 
			
any one of the defendants that is not a natural person; or



 
			
             (4)  the county of residence for the claimant if the 



 
			
claimant is a natural person residing in this state.



 
			
       (g)  If a civil action is brought under Subsection (d) in any 



 
			
one of the venues described by Subsection (f), then the action may 



 
			
not be transferred to a different venue without the written consent 



 
			
of all parties.



 
			
       (h)  Any contractual choice-of-forum provision that purports 



 
			
to require a civil action under Subsection (d) to be litigated in 



 
			
another forum shall be void as against public policy and may not be 



 
			
enforced in any state or federal court.



 
			
       SECTION 6.  SEVERABILITY.  (a)  Mindful of Leavitt v. Jane 



 
			
L., 518 U.S. 137 (1996), in which in the context of determining the 



 
			
severability of a state statute the United States Supreme Court 



 
			
held that an explicit statement of legislative intent is 



 
			
controlling, it is the intent of the legislature that every 



 
			
provision, section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or word 



 
			
in this Act, and every application of the provisions in this Act to 



 
			
every person, group of persons, or circumstances, are severable 



 
			
from each other.



 
			
       (b)  If any application of any provision in this Act to any 



 
			
person, group of persons, or circumstances is found by a court to be 



 
			
invalid, preempted, or unconstitutional, for any reason 



 
			
whatsoever, then the remaining applications of that provision to 



 
			
all other persons and circumstances shall be severed and preserved 



 
			
and shall remain in effect.  All constitutionally valid 



 
			
applications of the provisions in this Act shall be severed from any 



 
			
applications that a court finds to be invalid, preempted, or 



 
			
unconstitutional, because it is the legislature's intent and 



 
			
priority that every single valid application of every statutory 



 
			
provision be allowed to stand alone.



 
			
       (c)  The legislature further declares that it would have 



 
			
enacted this Act, and each provision, section, subsection, 



 
			
sentence, clause, phrase, or word and all constitutional 



 
			
applications of the provisions of this Act, irrespective of the 



 
			
fact that any provision, section, subsection, sentence, clause, 



 
			
phrase, or word or applications of this Act were to be declared 



 
			
invalid, preempted, or unconstitutional.



 
			
       (d)  If any provision of this Act is found by any court to be 



 
			
unconstitutionally vague, then the applications of that provision 



 
			
that do not present constitutional vagueness problems shall be 



 
			
severed and remain in force, consistent with the severability 



 
			
requirements of Subsections (a), (b), and (c) of this section.



 
			
       (e)  No court may decline to enforce the severability 



 
			
requirements of Subsections (a), (b), (c), and (d) of this section 



 
			
on the ground that severance would "rewrite" the statute or involve 



 
			
the court in legislative or lawmaking activity.  A court that 



 
			
declines to enforce or enjoins a state official from enforcing a 



 
			
statutory provision is never rewriting a statute or engaging in 



 
			
legislative or lawmaking activity, as the statute continues to 



 
			
contain the same words as before the court's decision.  A judicial 



 
			
injunction or declaration of unconstitutionality:



 
			
             (1)  is nothing more than an edict prohibiting 



 
			
enforcement of the disputed statute against the named parties to 



 
			
that lawsuit, which may subsequently be vacated by a later court if 



 
			
that court has a different understanding of the requirements of the 



 
			
Texas Constitution or United States Constitution;



 
			
             (2)  is not a formal amendment of the language in a 



 
			
statute; and



 
			
             (3)  no more rewrites a statute than a decision by the 



 
			
executive not to enforce a duly enacted statute in a limited and 



 
			
defined set of circumstances.



 
			
       (f)  If any state or federal court disregards any of the 



 
			
severability requirements in Subsection (a), (b), (c), (d), or (e), 



 
			
of this section and declares or finds any provision of this Act 



 
			
facially invalid, preempted, or unconstitutional, when there are 



 
			
discrete applications of that provision that can be enforced 



 
			
against a person, group of persons, or circumstances without 



 
			
violating federal law or the federal or state constitutions, then 



 
			
that provision shall be interpreted, as a matter of state law, as if 



 
			
the legislature had enacted a provision limited to the persons, 



 
			
group of persons, or circumstances for which the provision's 



 
			
application will not violate federal law or the federal or state 



 
			
constitutions, and every court shall adopt this saving construction 



 
			
of that provision until the court ruling that pronounced the 



 
			
provision facially invalid, preempted, or unconstitutional is 



 
			
vacated or overruled.



 
			
       SECTION 7.  This Act takes effect immediately if it receives 



 
			
a vote of two-thirds of all the members elected to each house, as 



 
			
provided by Section 39, Article III, Texas Constitution.  If this 



 
			
Act does not receive the vote necessary for immediate effect, this 



 
			
Act takes effect September 1, 2023.




ASSEMBLY, No. 1630 

STATE OF NEW JERSEY
220th LEGISLATURE
  
PRE-FILED FOR INTRODUCTION IN THE 2022 SESSION
 




 
Sponsored by:
Assemblyman  GREGORY P. MCGUCKIN
District 10 (Ocean)
Assemblyman  JOHN CATALANO
District 10 (Ocean)
 
Co-Sponsored by:
Assemblymen Scharfenberger and Peterson
 
 
 
 
SYNOPSIS
     "Fairness in Women's Sports Act." 
 
CURRENT VERSION OF TEXT 
     Introduced Pending Technical Review by Legislative
Counsel.
   




An Act concerning student participation in school-sanctioned
sporting events and supplementing chapter 11 of Title 18A of the New Jersey
Statutes.
 
     Be It
Enacted by the Senate and General Assembly of
the State of New Jersey:
 
     1.    The Legislature finds
and declares that:
     a.     In United States v.
Virginia, 518 U.S.515, 533 (1996), the Supreme Court noted that there are
"inherent differences between men and women," and these differences "remain
cause for celebration, but not for denigration of the members of either sex or
for artificial constraints on an individual's opportunity."
     b.    These "inherent
differences" range from chromosomal and hormonal differences to physiological
differences.
     c.     Men generally have
denser and stronger bones, tendons, and ligaments as well as larger hearts,
greater lung volume per body mass, a higher red blood cell count, and higher
hemoglobin.
     d.    Men also have higher
natural levels of testosterone, which affects traits such as hemoglobin levels,
body fat content, the storage and use of carbohydrates, and the development of
type 2 muscle fibers, all of which result in men being able to generate higher
speed and power during physical activity.
     e.     While classifications
based on sex are generally disfavored, the court in United States v. Virginia
also recognized that "sex classifications may be used to compensate women for
particular economic disabilities [they have] suffered, to promote equal
employment opportunity, [and] to advance full development of the talent and
capacities of our Nation's people."
     f.     One place where sex
classifications allow for the "full development of the talent and capacities of
our Nation's people" is in the context of sports and athletics.
     g.    The biological
differences between females and males, especially as they relate to natural
levels of testosterone, help to explain the male and female secondary sex
characteristics which develop during puberty and have lifelong effects,
including those most important for success in sports such as strength, speed,
and endurance.
     h.    Courts have recognized
that the inherent, physiological differences between males and females result
in different athletic capabilities.
     i.     Specifically, the
courts have noted that males and females are not similarly situated in athletic
competition due to innate physiological differences and that males generally
possess physiological advantages over their female competitors.
     j.     A recent study of
female and male Olympic performances since 1983 found that, although athletes
from both sexes improved over the time span, the "gender gap" between female
and male performances remained stable. This suggests that women's performances
at the high level will never match those of men.
     k.    The benefits that
natural testosterone provides to male athletes is not diminished through the
use of puberty blockers and cross-sex hormones. A recent study on the impact of
such treatments found that even after 12 months of hormonal therapy, a man who
identifies as a woman and is taking cross-sex hormones possesses a significant
advantage over female athletes and will still likely have performance benefits
over women.
     l.     Having separate
sex-specific teams furthers efforts to promote sex equality. Sex-specific teams
accomplish this by providing opportunities for female athletes to demonstrate
their skill, strength, and athletic abilities while also providing them with
opportunities to obtain recognition and accolades, college scholarships, and the
numerous other long-term benefits that flow from success in athletic endeavors.
 
     2.    a.  Interscholastic,
intercollegiate, intramural, or club athletic teams or sports that are sponsored
by a public or nonpublic school that is a member of the New Jersey State
Interscholastic Athletic Association (NJSIAA), or a public institution of
higher education or any higher education institution that is a member of the
national collegiate athletic association (NCAA), national association of
intercollegiate athletics (NAIA), or national junior college athletic
association (NJCAA) shall be expressly designated as one of the following based
on biological sex:
     (1)   males, men, or boys;
     (2)   females, women, or
girls; or
     (3)   coed or mixed.
     b.    Athletic teams or sports
designated for females, women, or girls shall not be open to students of the
male sex.  If a student's sex is disputed, a student shall establish sex by
presenting a signed physician's statement that shall indicate the student's sex
based solely on:
     (1)   the student's internal
and external reproductive anatomy;
     (2)   the student's normal
endogenously produced levels of testosterone; and
     (3)   an analysis of the
student's genetic makeup.
 
     3.    A government entity, any
licensing or accrediting organization, or any athletic association or
organization shall not entertain a complaint, open an investigation, or take
any other adverse action against a school or an institution of higher education
for maintaining separate interscholastic, intercollegiate, intramural, or club
athletic teams or sports for students of the female sex.
 
     4.    a.  Any student who is
deprived of an athletic opportunity or suffers any direct or indirect harm as a
result of a violation of this chapter shall have a private cause of action for
injunctive relief, damages, and any other relief available under law against
the school or institution of higher education.
     b.    Any student who is
subject to retaliation or other adverse action by a school, institution of
higher education, or athletic association or organization as a result of
reporting a violation of this chapter to an employee or representative of the
school, institution, or athletic association or organization, or to any State
or federal agency with oversight of schools or institutions of higher education
in the State, shall have a private cause of action for injunctive relief,
damages, and any other relief available under law against the school,
institution, or athletic association or organization.
     c.     Any school or
institution of higher education that suffers any direct or indirect harm as a
result of a violation of this chapter shall have a private cause of action for
injunctive relief, damages, and any other relief available under law against
the government entity, licensing or accrediting organization, or athletic
association or organization.
     d.    All civil actions
permitted under this section shall be initiated within two years after the harm
occurred. Persons or organizations who prevail on a claim brought pursuant to
this section shall be entitled to monetary damages, including for any
psychological, emotional, and physical harm suffered, reasonable attorney's
fees and costs, and any other appropriate relief.
 
     5.    This act shall take
effect immediately.
 
 
STATEMENT
 
     This bill requires that
participation in school-sanctioned sports be based on biological sex at birth. 
It provides that public and nonpublic schools, as well as institutions of
higher education, designate athletic or sports teams on the basis of biological
sex.  The bill also prohibits any athletic teams or sports designated for
females, women, or girls from being open to male students.  In the event the
sex of a student is disputed, the student will establish sex by presenting a
signed physician's statement that indicates the student's sex based solely on
(1) the student's internal and external reproductive anatomy; (2) the student's
normal endogenously produced levels of testosterone; and (3) an analysis of the
student's genetic makeup.  A school or institution of higher education would
not be subject to investigation or any adverse action for maintaining separate
athletic teams or sports for students of the female sex. 
     Students who are deprived of
athletic opportunities or suffer any harm as a result of a violation of the
provisions of this bill would have a private cause of action for injunctive
relief, damages, or other legal remedy permitted by law against the school or
institution of higher education.  A student subject to retaliation or any
adverse action by his or her school, institution of higher education, or
athletic association or organization for reporting a violation of the bill
would also have a private right of action against the school, institution of
higher education, or athletic association or organization.  Schools or
institutions of higher education that suffer any harm as a result of a
violation of this bill would likewise have a private cause of action for
injunctive relief, damages, or other legal remedy permitted by law.  Any student,
school, or institution of higher education able to bring suit under this bill
would be required to bring their claims within two years after the harm
occurred.  Students or organizations that prevail on any claim brought pursuant
to this bill would be entitled to monetary damages, including damages for any
psychological, emotional, and physical harm suffered, reasonable attorney's
fees and costs, and any other appropriate relief.

 


103RD GENERAL ASSEMBLY
State of Illinois
2023 and 2024
HB1562 Introduced , by Rep. David Friess SYNOPSIS AS INTRODUCED:

105 ILCS 25/1.25 new
 Amends the Interscholastic Athletic Organization Act. Provides that any athletic team or sport that is under the jurisdiction of an association or entity that provides for interscholastic athletics or athletic competition among schools and student must be expressly designated as (i) a male athletic team or sport, (ii) a female athletic team or sport, or (iii) a coeducational athletic team or sport. Provides that an athletic team or sport designated as being female is available only to participants who are female, based on their biological sex. Requires a school district or nonpublic school to obtain a written statement signed by a student's parent or guardian or the student verifying the student's age, biological sex, and that the student has not taken performance enhancing drugs; provides for a penalty for false or misleading statements. Prohibits a governmental entity or an association or entity that provides for interscholastic athletics or athletic competition among schools and students from entertaining a complaint, opening an investigation, or taking any other adverse action against a school district or nonpublic school for maintaining athletic teams or sports in accordance with these provisions.

LRB103 26949 RJT 53314 b
STATE MANDATES ACT MAY REQUIRE REIMBURSEMENT
MAY APPLY
  A BILL FOR 
HB1562LRB103 26949 RJT 53314 b

1 AN ACT concerning education.

2 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Illinois,
3represented in the General Assembly:


4 Section 5. The Interscholastic Athletic Organization Act 5is amended by adding Section 1.25 as follows:
6 (105 ILCS 25/1.25 new)7 Sec. 1.25. Designation of team or sport based on 8biological sex.9 (a) Any athletic team or sport that is under the 10jurisdiction of an association or other entity that has as one 11of its purposes promoting, sponsoring, regulating, or in any 12manner providing for interscholastic athletics or any form of 13athletic competition among schools and students within this 14State must be expressly designated as being: 15  (1) a male athletic team or sport;16  (2) a female athletic team or sport; or17  (3) a coeducational athletic team or sport. 18 (b) An athletic team or sport designated as being female 19is available only to participants who are female, based on 20their biological sex.21 (c) Once each school year and before allowing a student to 22participate on an athletic team or sport, the school district 23or nonpublic school that the student attends shall obtain a   HB1562- 2 -LRB103 26949 RJT 53314 b
1written statement verifying all of the following: 2  (1) The student's age.3  (2) The student's biological sex, as ascertained at or 4 before birth in accordance with the student's genetics and 5 reproductive biology.6  (3) That the student is not taking and has not taken 7 during the preceding 12 months any performance enhancing 8 drugs, including anabolic steroids. 9 The statement must be signed by the student's parent or 10guardian if the student is under the age of 18 years or by the 11student if the student is 18 years of age or older. 12 (d) If the school district or nonpublic school that the 13student attends has reasonable cause to believe that any 14information provided in accordance with this Section is false 15or misleading, the school district or nonpublic school may 16remove the student from any sport or athletic team and 17prohibit the student's participation in any sport or on any 18athletic team for the duration of the school year.19 (e) A governmental entity or an association or other 20entity that has as one of its purposes promoting, sponsoring, 21regulating, or in any manner providing for interscholastic 22athletics or any form of athletic competition among schools 23and students within this State may not entertain a complaint, 24open an investigation, or take any adverse action against a 25school district or nonpublic school for maintaining athletic 26teams or sports in accordance with this Section. 




 



 


 

		By: Toth
H.B. No. 631




 


 



 		
			

A BILL TO BE ENTITLED




 
			

AN ACT




 
			
relating to parental rights in education.



 
			
       BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF TEXAS:



 
			
       SECTION 1.  Chapter 26, Education Code, is amended by adding 



 
			
Section 26.016 to read as follows:



 
			
       Sec. 26.016.  PARENTAL RIGHTS AND REMEDIES



 
			
       (a)  The Texas Education Agency shall adopt procedures for 



 
			
notifying a student's parent if there is a change in the student's  



 
			
services or monitoring related to the student's mental, emotional, 



 
			
or physical health or well-being and the school's ability to 



 
			
provide a safe and supportive learning environment for the student.  



 
			
The procedures must reinforce the fundamental right of parents to 



 
			
make decisions regarding the upbringing and control of their 



 
			
children by requiring school district personnel to encourage a 



 
			
student to discuss issues relating to his or her well-being with his 



 
			
or her parent or to facilitate discussion of the issue with the 



 
			
parent.  The procedures may not prohibit parents from accessing any 



 
			
of their student's education and health records created, 



 
			
maintained, or used by the school district.



 
			
       (b)  At the beginning of the school year, each school 



 
			
district shall notify parents of each healthcare service offered at 



 
			
their student's school and the option to withhold consent or 



 
			
decline any specific service.  Parental consent to a health care 



 
			
service does  not waive the parent's right to access his or her 



 
			
student's educational or health records or to be notified about a 



 
			
change in his or her student's services or monitoring as provided by 



 
			
this section.



 
			
       (c)  Before administering a student well-being questionnaire 



 
			
or health screening form to a student in kindergarten through grade 



 
			
5, the school district must provide the questionnaire or health 



 
			
screening form to the parent and obtain the permission of the 



 
			
parent.



 
			
       (d)  Each school district shall adopt procedures for a parent  



 
			
to notify the principal, or his or her designee, regarding concerns  



 
			
under this section at his or her student's school and the process 



 
			
for resolving those concerns within 7 calendar days after 



 
			
notification by the parent.



 
			
             (1)  At a minimum, the procedures must require that 



 
			
within 30 days after notification by the parent that the concern 



 
			
remains  unresolved, the school district must either resolve the 



 
			
concern or provide a statement of the reasons for not resolving the 



 
			
concern.



 
			
             (2)  If a concern is not resolved by the school 



 
			
district, a parent may:



 
			
                   (A)  Request the Commissioner of Education to 



 
			
appoint a special magistrate who is a member of the State Bar of 



 
			
Texas in good standing and who has at least 5 years' experience in 



 
			
administrative law.  The special magistrate shall determine facts 



 
			
relating to the dispute over the school district procedure or 



 
			
practice, consider information provided by the school district, and 



 
			
render a recommended decision for resolution to the State Board of 



 
			
Education within 30 days after receipt of the request by the parent.  



 
			
The State Board of Education must approve or reject the  recommended 



 
			
decision at its next regularly scheduled meeting that is more than 7 



 
			
calendar days and no more than 30 days after the date the 



 
			
recommended decision is transmitted.  The costs of the special 



 
			
magistrate shall be borne by the school district.  The State Board 



 
			
of Education shall adopt rules, including forms, necessary to 



 
			
implement this subsection.



 
			
                   (B)  Bring an action against the school district 



 
			
to obtain a declaratory judgment that the school district procedure 



 
			
or practice violates this section and seek injunctive relief.  A 



 
			
court may award damages and shall award reasonable attorney fees 



 
			
and court costs to a parent who receives declaratory or injunctive 



 
			
relief.



 
			
             (3)  Each school district shall adopt policies to 



 
			
notify parents of the procedures required under this subsection.



 
			
       SECTION 2.  By June 30, 2024, the Texas Education Agency 



 
			
shall review and update, as necessary, school counseling frameworks 



 
			
and standards; educator practices and professional conduct 



 
			
principles; and any other student services personnel guidelines, 



 
			
standards, or frameworks in accordance with the requirements of 



 
			
this act.



 
			
       SECTION 3.  Section 28.004, Education Code, is amended by 



 
			
amending subsection (i-3) and adding subsection (i-4) to read as 



 
			
follows:



 
			
       (i-3)  A school district may not adopt procedures or student 



 
			
support forms that prohibit school district personnel from 



 
			
notifying a parent about his or her student's mental, emotional, or 



 
			
physical health or well-being, or a change in related services or 



 
			
monitoring, or that encourage or have the effect of encouraging a 



 
			
student to withhold from a parent such information.  School 



 
			
district personnel may not discourage or prohibit parental  



 
			
notification of and involvement in critical decisions affecting a 



 
			
student's mental, emotional, or physical health or well-being.



 
			
[Subsection (i-2) and this subsection expire August 1, 2024.]



 
			
       (i-4)  Classroom instruction by school personnel or third 



 
			
parties on sexual orientation or gender identity may not occur in 



 
			
kindergarten through grade 5 or in a manner that is not age 



 
			
appropriate or developmentally appropriate for students in 



 
			
accordance with state standards.



 
			
       SECTION 4.  This Act takes effect immediately if it receives 



 
			
a vote of two-thirds of all the members elected to each house, as 



 
			
provided by Section 39, Article III, Texas Constitution.  If this 



 
			
Act does not receive the vote necessary for immediate effect, this 



 
			
Act takes effect September 1, 2023.





 
88R617 EAS-D


 


 

		By: Toth
H.B. No. 41




 


 



 		
			

A BILL TO BE ENTITLED




 
			

AN ACT




 
			
relating to professional liability insurance coverage for and 



 
			
prohibitions on the provision to certain children of procedures and 



 
			
treatments for gender transitioning, gender reassignment, or 



 
			
gender dysphoria.



 
			
       BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF TEXAS:



 
			
       SECTION 1.  Chapter 161, Health and Safety Code, is amended 



 
			
by adding Subchapter X to read as follows:



 
			
SUBCHAPTER X.  GENDER TRANSITIONING AND GENDER REASSIGNMENT 



 
			
PROCEDURES AND TREATMENTS FOR CERTAIN CHILDREN



 
			
       Sec. 161.701.  DEFINITIONS.  In this subchapter:



 
			
             (1)  "Child" means an individual who is younger than 18 



 
			
years of age.



 
			
             (2)  "Health care provider" means a person other than a 



 
			
physician who is licensed, certified, or otherwise authorized by 



 
			
the laws of this state to provide or render health care or to 



 
			
dispense or prescribe a prescription drug in the ordinary course of 



 
			
business or practice of a profession.



 
			
             (3)  "Physician" means a person licensed to practice 



 
			
medicine in this state.



 
			
       Sec. 161.702.  PROHIBITED PROVISION OF GENDER TRANSITIONING 



 
			
OR GENDER REASSIGNMENT PROCEDURES AND TREATMENTS TO CERTAIN 



 
			
CHILDREN.  For the purpose of transitioning a child's biological 



 
			
sex as determined by the sex organs, chromosomes, and endogenous 



 
			
profiles of the child or affirming the child's perception of the 



 
			
child's sex if that perception is inconsistent with the child's 



 
			
biological sex, a physician or health care provider may not:



 
			
             (1)  perform a surgery to sterilize the child, 



 
			
including:



 
			
                   (A)  castration;



 
			
                   (B)  vasectomy;



 
			
                   (C)  hysterectomy;



 
			
                   (D)  oophorectomy;



 
			
                   (E)  metoidioplasty;



 
			
                   (F)  orchiectomy;



 
			
                   (G)  penectomy;



 
			
                   (H)  phalloplasty; and



 
			
                   (I)  vaginoplasty;



 
			
             (2)  perform a mastectomy;



 
			
             (3)  provide, administer, prescribe, or dispense any of 



 
			
the following prescription drugs that induce transient or permanent 



 
			
infertility:



 
			
                   (A)  puberty suppression or blocking prescription 



 
			
drugs to stop or delay normal puberty;



 
			
                   (B)  supraphysiologic doses of testosterone to 



 
			
females; or



 
			
                   (C)  supraphysiologic doses of estrogen to males; 



 
			
or



 
			
             (4)  remove any otherwise healthy or non-diseased body 



 
			
part or tissue.



 
			
       Sec. 161.703.  EXCEPTIONS.  The prohibitions under Section 



 
			
161.702 do not apply to the provision by a physician or health care 



 
			
provider, with the consent of the child's parent or legal guardian, 



 
			
of appropriate and medically necessary gender transitioning or 



 
			
gender reassignment procedures or treatments to a child who:



 
			
             (1)  is born with a medically verifiable genetic 



 
			
disorder of sex development, including:



 
			
                   (A)  46, XX chromosomes with virilization;



 
			
                   (B)  46, XY chromosomes with undervirilization; 



 
			
or



 
			
                   (C)  both ovarian and testicular tissue; or



 
			
             (2)  does not have the normal sex chromosome structure 



 
			
for male or female as determined by a physician through genetic 



 
			
testing.



 
			
       SECTION 2.  Subchapter F, Chapter 1901, Insurance Code, is 



 
			
amended by adding Section 1901.256 to read as follows:



 
			
       Sec. 1901.256.  PROHIBITED COVERAGE FOR PROVISION OF CERTAIN 



 
			
GENDER-RELATED PROCEDURES AND TREATMENTS TO CERTAIN CHILDREN.  A 



 
			
professional liability insurance policy issued to a physician or 



 
			
health care provider may not include coverage for damages assessed 



 
			
against the physician or health care provider who provides to a 



 
			
child gender transitioning or gender reassignment procedures or 



 
			
treatments that are prohibited by Section 161.702, Health and 



 
			
Safety Code.



 
			
       SECTION 3.  Section 164.052, Occupations Code, is amended by 



 
			
amending Subsection (a) and adding Subsection (d) to read as 



 
			
follows:



 
			
       (a)  A physician or an applicant for a license to practice 



 
			
medicine commits a prohibited practice if that person:



 
			
             (1)  submits to the board a false or misleading 



 
			
statement, document, or certificate in an application for a 



 
			
license;



 
			
             (2)  presents to the board a license, certificate, or 



 
			
diploma that was illegally or fraudulently obtained;



 
			
             (3)  commits fraud or deception in taking or passing an 



 
			
examination;



 
			
             (4)  uses alcohol or drugs in an intemperate manner 



 
			
that, in the board's opinion, could endanger a patient's life;



 
			
             (5)  commits unprofessional or dishonorable conduct 



 
			
that is likely to deceive or defraud the public, as provided by 



 
			
Section 164.053, or injure the public;



 
			
             (6)  uses an advertising statement that is false, 



 
			
misleading, or deceptive;



 
			
             (7)  advertises professional superiority or the 



 
			
performance of professional service in a superior manner if that 



 
			
advertising is not readily subject to verification;



 
			
             (8)  purchases, sells, barters, or uses, or offers to 



 
			
purchase, sell, barter, or use, a medical degree, license, 



 
			
certificate, or diploma, or a transcript of a license, certificate, 



 
			
or diploma in or incident to an application to the board for a 



 
			
license to practice medicine;



 
			
             (9)  alters, with fraudulent intent, a medical license, 



 
			
certificate, or diploma, or a transcript of a medical license, 



 
			
certificate, or diploma;



 
			
             (10)  uses a medical license, certificate, or diploma, 



 
			
or a transcript of a medical license, certificate, or diploma that 



 
			
has been:



 
			
                   (A)  fraudulently purchased or issued;



 
			
                   (B)  counterfeited; or



 
			
                   (C)  materially altered;



 
			
             (11)  impersonates or acts as proxy for another person 



 
			
in an examination required by this subtitle for a medical license;



 
			
             (12)  engages in conduct that subverts or attempts to 



 
			
subvert an examination process required by this subtitle for a 



 
			
medical license;



 
			
             (13)  impersonates a physician or permits another to 



 
			
use the person's license or certificate to practice medicine in 



 
			
this state;



 
			
             (14)  directly or indirectly employs a person whose 



 
			
license to practice medicine has been suspended, canceled, or 



 
			
revoked;



 
			
             (15)  associates in the practice of medicine with a 



 
			
person:



 
			
                   (A)  whose license to practice medicine has been 



 
			
suspended, canceled, or revoked; or



 
			
                   (B)  who has been convicted of the unlawful 



 
			
practice of medicine in this state or elsewhere;



 
			
             (16)  performs or procures a criminal abortion, aids or 



 
			
abets in the procuring of a criminal abortion, attempts to perform 



 
			
or procure a criminal abortion, or attempts to aid or abet the 



 
			
performance or procurement of a criminal abortion;



 
			
             (17)  directly or indirectly aids or abets the practice 



 
			
of medicine by a person, partnership, association, or corporation 



 
			
that is not licensed to practice medicine by the board;



 
			
             (18)  performs an abortion on a woman who is pregnant 



 
			
with a viable unborn child during the third trimester of the 



 
			
pregnancy unless:



 
			
                   (A)  the abortion is necessary to prevent the 



 
			
death of the woman;



 
			
                   (B)  the viable unborn child has a severe, 



 
			
irreversible brain impairment; or



 
			
                   (C)  the woman is diagnosed with a significant 



 
			
likelihood of suffering imminent severe, irreversible brain damage 



 
			
or imminent severe, irreversible paralysis;



 
			
             (19)  performs an abortion on an unemancipated minor 



 
			
without the written consent of the child's parent, managing 



 
			
conservator, or legal guardian or without a court order, as 



 
			
provided by Section 33.003 or 33.004, Family Code, unless the 



 
			
abortion is necessary due to a medical emergency, as defined by 



 
			
Section 171.002, Health and Safety Code;



 
			
             (20)  otherwise performs an abortion on an 



 
			
unemancipated minor in violation of Chapter 33, Family Code;



 
			
             (21)  performs or induces or attempts to perform or 



 
			
induce an abortion in violation of Subchapter C, F, or G, Chapter 



 
			
171, Health and Safety Code;



 
			
             (22)  in complying with the procedures outlined in 



 
			
Sections 166.045 and 166.046, Health and Safety Code, wilfully 



 
			
fails to make a reasonable effort to transfer a patient to a 



 
			
physician who is willing to comply with a directive; [or]



 
			
             (23)  performs or delegates to another individual the 



 
			
performance of a pelvic examination on an anesthetized or 



 
			
unconscious patient in violation of Section 167A.002, Health and 



 
			
Safety Code; or



 
			
             (24)  for the purpose of facilitating the gender 



 
			
transition or treating the gender dysphoria of an unemancipated 



 
			
minor:



 
			
                   (A)  provides, administers, prescribes, or 



 
			
dispenses a puberty suppression or blocking prescription drug or 



 
			
cross-sex hormone to the minor, including by writing a false or 



 
			
fictitious prescription; or



 
			
                   (B)  performs or attempts to perform a surgical 



 
			
intervention on the minor.



 
			
       (d)  Notwithstanding Subsection (a)(24), a physician or 



 
			
applicant for a license to practice medicine does not commit a 



 
			
prohibited practice if the physician or applicant provides a 



 
			
puberty suppression or blocking prescription drug to an 



 
			
unemancipated minor for the purpose of normalizing puberty for a 



 
			
minor experiencing precocious puberty.



 
			
       SECTION 4.  Section 1901.256, Insurance Code, as added by 



 
			
this Act, applies only to a medical professional liability 



 
			
insurance policy that is delivered, issued for delivery, or renewed 



 
			
on or after January 1, 2024. An insurance policy that is delivered, 



 
			
issued for delivery, or renewed before January 1, 2024, is governed 



 
			
by the law in effect immediately before the effective date of this 



 
			
Act, and that law is continued in effect for that purpose.



 
			
       SECTION 5.  Section 164.052, Occupations Code, as amended by 



 
			
this Act, applies only to conduct that occurs on or after the 



 
			
effective date of this Act. Conduct that occurs before the 



 
			
effective date of this Act is governed by the law in effect on the 



 
			
date the conduct occurred, and the former law is continued in effect 



 
			
for that purpose.



 
			
       SECTION 6.  This Act takes effect September 1, 2023.




 
 
PREFILED DEC 20 2022



REFERENCE TITLE: pronouns; biological
  sex; school policies




 
 
 
 
State of
  Arizona
Senate
Fifty-sixth
  Legislature
First Regular
  Session
2023
 
 




SB 1001




 




Introduced by 
Senator Kavanagh
 



 
 
 
 
 
 
 
An Act
 
amending
title 15, chapter 5, article 1, Arizona Revised Statutes, by adding section
15-509; relating to school employees.
 
 
(TEXT OF BILL BEGINS ON NEXT PAGE)
 




Be it enacted by the Legislature of the State of Arizona:
Section 1. Title 15, chapter 5, article 1,
Arizona Revised Statutes, is amended by adding section 15-509, to read:
START_STATUTE15-509. Pronouns; biological sex; parental permission; prohibition;
policies
a. An employee or independent
contractor of a school district or charter school may not knowingly address,
identify or refer to a student who is under eighteen years of age by A pronoun
that differs from the pronoun that aligns with the student's biological sex
unless the school district or charter school receives written permission from
the student's parent.
B. A school district or charter
school may not require an employee or independent contractor to address,
identify or refer to a person by a pronoun that differs from the pronoun that
aligns with the person's biological sex if doing so is contrary to the
employee's or independent contractor's religious or moral convictions.
C. Each school district governing
board and charter school governing body shall adopt policies to implement this
section. 
D. This section does not prohibit any
person described in subsection A of this section from discussing matters of
public concern outside the context of the person's official duties. END_STATUTE


<![endif]-->




HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES


H.B. NO.


891




THIRTY-SECOND LEGISLATURE, 2023


 




STATE OF HAWAII


 




 


 




 




 
 



A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
relating
to gender transition surgery.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 




     SECTION 1.
The legislature finds that the culture war continues to rage on in the United
States. Over the years, there have been many social disputes arising within the
cultural conversations of the United States surrounding gender, gender
identity, gender expression, and now the topic of transgenderism has a firm
grip on the public discourse. Topics such as transgenderism evoke many powerful
emotions from people with various opinions, across all levels of society. This
appears to be the next big society issue that will be addressed either in the
legislative branch or the judicial branch of government. 
     The
legislature also finds that the human brain does not reach full development
until roughly age 25. This is a widely known and accepted fact, and one that
has been instrumental in the background of enacting laws to protect minors.
This is why minors cannot own firearms, buy alcohol, vote, and in most
circumstances cannot make other decisions of legal consequence such as enter
into contracts. However, the new cultural movement seems to be perfectly fine
with allowing minors to request life-altering medical surgeries that alter
their bodies permanently. These "gender transition" surgeries include
but are not limited to such operations as double mastectomies, feminizing
vaginoplasty, masculinizing phalloplasty, scrotoplasty, metoidioplasty, and
facial reconstruction surgery.
     The
legislature further finds that protecting children from decisions that they
have no capacity to fully understand is both necessary and proper. There is a
growing number of "detransitioners," or those individuals who have
undergone gender transition surgeries or therapy, but have since decided to
transition back to their original gender. There are many stories of
detransitioners that have started to permeate the discussion of transgenderism,
and these experiences only reinforce the need to protect minors from making
irreversible medical decisions that they are unable to fully understand. To
preserve the innocence of childhood and prevent future regret among the current
youth population, it is imperative that this state prohibit gender reassignment
/ gender transition surgeries on minors. 
     The
purpose of this Act is to prohibit gender reassignment / transition surgeries
for minors. 
     SECTION 2.
Chapter 453, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new section to be
properly designated and to read as follows:
     "§453 -  Prohibition of gender transition surgeries
on minors. (a) As used in this section:
     "Sex"
means the biological state of being female or male, based on the individual's
sex organs, chromosomes, and endogenous hormone profiles. 
     "Professional
incompetency" means:
(1) One or more
instances involving failure to adhere to the applicable standard of care to a
degree that constitutes gross negligence. 
(2) Repeated instances
involving failure to adhere to the applicable standard of care to a degree that
constitutes ordinary negligence.
(3) A pattern of
practice or other behavior that demonstrates a manifest incapacity or
incompetence to practice the healing arts. 
     "Unprofessional
conduct" means:
(1) Solicitating
professional patronage through the use of fraudulent or false advertisements,
or profiting by the acts of those representing themselves to be agents of the
licensee. 
(2) Representing to a
patient that a manifestly incurable disease, condition, or injury can be
permanently cured.
(3) Assisting in the
care or treatment of a patient without the consent of the patient, the
attending physician, or the patient's legal representatives.
(4) The use of any
letters, words, or terms as an affix, on stationary, in advertisements or
otherwise indicating that such person is entitled to practice a branch of the
healing arts for which such person is not licensed. 
(5) Performing,
procuring, or aiding and abetting in the performance or procurement of a
criminal abortion. 
(6) Willfully betraying
confidential information.
(7) Advertising
professional superiority or the performance of professional services in a
superior manner.
(8) Advertising to
guarantee any professional service or to perform any operation painlessly.
(9) Participating in any
action as a staff member of a medical care facility that is designed to exclude
or that results in the exclusion of any person licensed to practice medicine
and surgery from the medical staff of a nonprofit medical care facility
licensed in this state because of the branch of the healing arts practiced by
such person or without just cause. 
(10) Engaging in conduct
likely to deceive, defraud, or harm the public.
(11) Making a false or
misleading statement regarding the licensee's skill or the efficacy or value of
the drug, treatment, or remedy prescribed by the licensee or at the licensee's
direction in the treatment of any disease or other condition of the body or
mind. 
(12) Aiding or abetting
the practice of the healing arts by an unlicensed, incompetent, or impaired
person. 
(13) Allowing another
person or organization to use the license's license to practice the healing
arts.
(14) Committing any acts
of sexual abuse, misconduct, or other improper sexual contact that exploits the
licensee-patient relationship with a patient or person responsible for the
healthcare decisions concerning such patient. 
(15) Using any false,
fraudulent, or deceptive statement in any document connected with the practice
of the healing arts including the intentional falsifying or fraudulent altering
of a patient or medical care facility record. 
(16) Obtaining any fee by
fraud, deceit, or misrepresentation.
(17) Directly or
indirectly giving or receiving any fee, commission, rebate, or other
compensation for professional services not actually and personally rendered,
other than through the legal functioning of lawful professional partnerships,
corporations, limited liability companies, or associations.
(18) Failing to transfer
patient records through another licensee when requested to do so by the subject
patient or by such patient's legally designated representative.
(19) Performing
unnecessary tests, examinations, or services that have no legitimate medical
purpose.
(20) Charging an
excessive fee for services rendered.
(21) Prescribing,
dispensing, administering, or distributing a prescription drug or substance,
including a controlled substance, in an improper or inappropriate manner, or
for other than a valid medical purpose, or not in the course of the licensee's
professional practice. 
(22) Failing repeatedly
to practice healing arts with that level of care, skill, and treatment that is
recognized by a reasonably prudent similar practitioner as being acceptable
under similar conditions and circumstances. 
(23) Failing to keep
written medical records that accurately describe the services rendered to the
patient, including patient histories, pertinent findings, examination results,
and test results. 
(24) Delegating
professional responsibilities to a person when the licensee knows or has reason
to know that such a person is not qualified by training, experience, or licensure
to perform them. 
(25) Using experimental
forms of therapy without proper informed patient consent, without conforming to
generally accepted criteria or standard protocols, without keeping detailed
legible records, or without having periodic analysis of the study and results
reviewed by a committee or peers.
(26) Prescribing,
dispensing, administering, or distributing an anabolic steroid or human growth
hormone for other than a valid medical purpose. Bodybuilding, muscle
enhancement, or increasing muscle bulk or strength through the use of an
anabolic steroid or human growth hormone by a person who is in good health is
not a valid medical purpose. 
(27) Referring a patient
to a health care entity for services if the licensee has a significant
investment interest in the health care entity, unless the licensee informs the
patient in writing of a significant investment interest and that the patient
may obtain such services elsewhere. 
(28) Failing to properly
supervise, direct, or delegate acts that constitute the healing arts to a
persons who perform services pursuant to each licensee's direction,
supervision, order, referral, delegation, or practice protocols. I
(29) Charging, billing,
or otherwise soliciting payment from any patient, patient's representative, or
insurer for anatomic pathology services, if such services are not personally
rendered by the licensee, or under such license's direct supervision.
(30) Engaging in a
conduct that violates patient trust and exploits the licensee-patient
relationship for personal gain.
(31) Obstructing a board
investigation including, but not limited to, engaging in one or more of the
following acts:
     (A) Falsifying or concealing a material fact;
(B) Knowingly making or
causing to be made any false or misleading statement or writing; or
(C) Other acts or
conduct likely to deceive or defraud the board. 
     (b) Unlawful
gender transition / gender reassignment surgery is knowingly performing, or
causing to be performed, any of the following upon a child under 18 years of
age for the purpose of attempting to change or affirm the child's perception of
the child's sex, if that perception is inconsistent with the child's sex:
(1) Performing a surgery
that sterilizes, including, but not limited to, castration, vasectomy,
hysterectomy, oophorectomy, orchiectomy, and penectomy;
(2) Performing a surgery
that artificially constructs tissue with the appearance of genitalia,
including, but not limited to, metoidioplasty, phalloplasty, and vaginoplasty;
(3) Performing a
mastectomy;
(4) Prescribing,
dispensing, administering, or otherwise supplying the following medications:
(A) Puberty-blocking
medication to stop normal puberty;
(B) Supraphysiologic
doses of testosterone to females; or
(C) Supraphysiologic
doses of estrogen to males; or
     (5)
Removing any otherwise healthy or nondiseased body part or tissue. 
     (c) Unlawful
gender reassignment / gender transition surgery is a Class A Felony. The
individual performing the surgery shall be solely liable under this section.  
     (d) The
provisions of this section shall not apply if a child was born with a medically
verifiable disorder of sex development, including:
(1) A child with
external biological sex characteristics that are irresolvably ambiguous, such
as a child born with having 46,XX chromosomes with virilization, 46,XY
Chromosomes with undervirilization, or both ovarian and testicular tissue; or 
(2) When a physician has
otherwise diagnosed a disorder of sexual development, in which the physician
has determined through genetic or biochemical testing that the child does not
have the normal sex chromosome structure, sex steroid hormone production or sex
steroid hormone action for a male or female.
     SECTION
3.  New statutory material is
underscored.
     SECTION 4.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 



INTRODUCED BY:


_____________________________




 


 







 


 
Report Title:
Prohibition
on Gender Reassignment Surgeries for Minors.
 
Description:
Prohibits
the performance of gender reassignment surgeries on minors. Establishes a Class
A felony for those who perform gender reassignment surgeries on minors. 
 
 
 
The summary description
of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is
not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.




House
File
2
-
Introduced


HOUSE
FILE
2


BY
STONE
,
HOLT
,
WHEELER
,


COLLINS
,
MOORE
,
JENEARY
,


VONDRAN
,
FISHER
,
DUNWELL
,


MEGGERS
,
WULF
,
SHIPLEY
,


BRADLEY
,
GOLDING
,


GRABER
,
JOHNSON
,
DEYOE
,


MOMMSEN
,
BODEN
,
KAUFMANN
,


FRY
,
ANDREWS
,
THOMSON
,


HENDERSON
,
WOOD
,
HORA
,


OSMUNDSON
,
WINDSCHITL
,


GRASSLEY
,
BOSSMAN
,
and


GERHOLD


A
BILL
FOR


An
Act
relating
to
public
contracts,
public
fund
investing,
1


and
lending
practices
with
certain
companies
that
engage
2


in
economic
boycotts
based
on
environmental,
social,
or
3


governance
criteria,
and
including
effective
date
and
4


applicability
provisions.
5


BE
IT
ENACTED
BY
THE
GENERAL
ASSEMBLY
OF
THE
STATE
OF
IOWA:
6


TLSB
1119YH
(6)
90


ec/rn




H.F.
2


Section
1.
Section
12.8,
subsection
1,
Code
2023,
is
amended
1


to
read
as
follows:
2


1.
The
treasurer
of
state
shall
invest
or
deposit,
subject
3


to
chapters
12F
,
12H
,
and


12J
,
and
12K
and
as
provided
by
law,
4


any
of
the
public
funds
not
currently
needed
for
operating
5


expenses
and
shall
do
so
upon
receipt
of
monthly
notice
from
6


the
director
of
the
department
of
administrative
services
of
7


the
amount
not
so
needed.
In
the
event
of
loss
on
redemption
8


or
sale
of
securities
invested
as
prescribed
by
law,
and
if
9


the
transaction
is
reported
to
the
executive
council,
neither
10


the
treasurer
nor
director
of
the
department
of
administrative
11


services
is
personally
liable
but
the
loss
shall
be
charged
12


against
the
funds
which
would
have
received
the
profits
or
13


interest
of
the
investment
and
there
is
appropriated
from
the
14


funds
the
amount
so
required.
15


Sec.
2.
NEW
SECTION


.
12K.1
Legislative
findings
and
intent.
16


The
general
assembly
is
deeply
concerned
and
does
not
17


support
boycotts
and
related
tactics
that
have
become
a
tool
18


of
economic
warfare
against
numerous
essential
industries,
19


including
fossil
fuel
production,
agriculture,
timber
20


production,
and
firearms,
by
corporations
and
public
and
21


private
institutional
investors
and
proxy
advisors
in
support
22


of
environmental,
social,
and
governance
goals
often
at
odds
23


with
prudent
financial
management.
Therefore,
the
general
24


assembly
intends
that
public
entities
and
public
funds,
when
25


financially
prudent,
should
avoid
doing
business
with
companies
26


and
investors
that
engage
in
such
economic
warfare,
and
27


threaten
harm
to
this
state,
its
businesses,
and
citizens.


28


Sec.
3.
NEW
SECTION


.
12K.2
Definitions.


29


As
used
in
this
chapter,
unless
the
context
otherwise
30


requires:
31


1.
“Company”
means
any
organization,
association,
32


corporation,
partnership,
joint
venture,
limited
partnership,
33


limited
liability
partnership,
limited
liability
company,
34


or
other
entity
or
business
association,
including
all
35


-1-


LSB
1119YH
(6)
90


ec/rn
1/
10








H.F.
2


wholly
owned
subsidiaries,
majority-owned
subsidiaries,
1


parent
companies,
or
affiliates
of
such
entities
or
business
2


associations,
that
exists
for
profit-making
purposes
with
at
3


least
ten
full-time
employees.
4


2.
“Economic
boycott”
means
refusing
to
deal
with,
5


terminating
business
activities
with,
or
otherwise
taking
6


any
commercial
action
that
is
intended
to
penalize,
inflict
7


economic
harm
on,
limit
commercial
relations
with,
or
change
8


or
limit
the
activities
of
a
protected
company
or
a
company
9


that
does
business
with
a
protected
company
in
order
to
further
10


environmental,
social,
or
governance
goals
unrelated
to
the
11


financial
condition
of
the
protected
company.
12


3.
“Explanatory
evidence”
includes
but
is
not
limited
to
13


advertising,
statements,
explanations,
reports,
letters
to
14


clients,
communications
with
portfolio
companies,
statements
of
15


principles,
or
participation
in,
affiliation
with,
or
status
as
16


a
signatory
to,
any
coalition,
initiative,
joint
statement
of
17


principles,
or
agreement.
18


4.
“Improper
financial
factors”
means
taking
any
action
or
19


considering
any
factor,
beyond
what
controlling
federal
or
20


state
law
requires,
with
a
purpose
to
further
environmental,
21


social,
or
governance
goals
based
upon
explanatory
evidence
22


indicating
such
a
purpose
to
accomplish
any
of
the
following:
23


a.
Facilitating
the
elimination,
reduction,
offsetting,
or
24


disclosing
of
greenhouse
gas
emissions.
25


b.
Instituting
or
assessing
corporate
board
criteria,
or
26


employment
composition,
compensation,
or
disclosure
criteria
27


that
incorporates
characteristics
protected
in
this
state
under
28


chapter
216,
the
Iowa
civil
rights
Act.
29


c.
Divesting
from,
limiting
investment
in,
or
limiting
the
30


activities
or
investments
of
any
protected
company.
31


5.
“Investment
advisor”
means
any
person
acting
on
behalf
of
32


a
public
fund
as
an
investment
manager
or
proxy
advisor.
33


6.
“Protected
company”
means
a
company,
without
violating
34


controlling
federal
or
state
law,
that
meets
any
of
the
35


-2-


LSB
1119YH
(6)
90


ec/rn
2/
10




H.F.
2


following
criteria:
1


a.
Engages
in
the
exploration,
production,
utilization,
2


transportation,
sale,
or
manufacturing
of
fossil
fuel-based
3


energy,
timber,
mining,
or
agriculture.
4


b.
Engages
in,
facilitates,
or
supports
the
manufacture,
5


distribution,
sale,
import,
export,
or
lawful
use
of
firearms,
6


firearm
parts,
firearm
accessories,
or
ammunition.
7


c.
Does
not
meet,
is
not
expected
to
meet,
or
does
not
8


commit
to
meet
environmental
standards
or
disclosure
criteria,
9


in
particular
to
eliminate,
reduce,
offset,
or
disclose
10


greenhouse
gas
emissions.
11


d.
Does
not
meet,
is
not
expected
to
meet,
or
does
not
12


commit
to
meet
corporate
board,
or
employment,
composition,
13


compensation,
or
disclosure
criteria
that
incorporates
14


characteristics
protected
in
this
state
under
chapter
216,
the
15


Iowa
civil
rights
Act.
16


e.
Does
not
facilitate,
is
not
expected
to
facilitate,
or
17


does
not
commit
to
facilitate
access
to
abortion,
sex
or
gender
18


change,
or
transgender
surgery.
19


7.
“Public
entity”
means
the
state,
political
subdivisions
20


of
the
state,
public
school
corporations,
and
all
public
21


officers,
boards,
commissions,
departments,
agencies,
and
22


authorities
empowered
by
law
to
enter
into
public
contracts
for
23


the
expenditure
of
public
funds,
including
the
state
board
of
24


regents
and
institutions
under
the
control
of
the
state
board
25


of
regents.
26


8.
“Public
fund”
means
the
treasurer
of
state,
the
state


27


board
of
regents,
the
public
safety
peace
officers’
retirement
28


system
created
in
chapter
97A,
the
Iowa
public
employees’
29


retirement
system
created
in
chapter
97B,
the
statewide
fire
30


and
police
retirement
system
created
in
chapter
411,
or
the
31


judicial
retirement
system
created
in
chapter
602.
32


Sec.
4.
NEW
SECTION


.
12K.3
Public
funds
——
requirements.
33


1.
A
public
fund
shall
not
do
any
of
the
following:
34


a.
Grant
proxy
voting
authority
to
any
person
who
is
not
35


-3-


LSB
1119YH
(6)
90


ec/rn
3/
10





H.F.
2


a
part
of
the
public
fund
or
adopt
a
practice
of
following
1


the
recommendations
of
a
proxy
advisor
unless
that
person
2


or
advisor
has
a
practice
of,
and
in
writing
commits
to,
3


following
guidelines
to
act
solely
in
the
financial
interest
of
4


participants
and
beneficiaries
of
the
public
fund
and
not
based
5


upon
improper
financial
factors.
6


b.
Enter
into
an
agreement
with
an
investment
advisor
7


unless
the
investment
advisor
has
a
practice
of,
and
in
writing
8


commits
to,
following
guidelines
when
engaging
with
portfolio
9


companies
and
voting
shares
or
proxies,
and
to
act
solely
in
10


the
financial
interest
of
participants
and
beneficiaries
of
the
11


public
fund
and
not
based
upon
improper
financial
factors.
12


c.
Enter
into
an
agreement
with
an
investment
advisor
13


unless
the
investment
advisor
has
a
practice
of,
and
in
writing
14


commits
to,
making
investment
decisions
based
solely
upon
the
15


financial
interest
of
participants
and
beneficiaries
of
the
16


public
fund
and
not
based
upon
improper
financial
factors.
17


2.
All
proxy
votes
on
behalf
of
a
public
fund
shall
be
18


tabulated
and
reported
annually
to
the
public
fund.
For
19


each
vote,
the
report
shall
contain
a
vote
caption,
the
20


vote
on
behalf
of
the
public
fund,
the
recommendation
of
21


company
management,
and,
if
applicable,
the
proxy
advisor’s
22


recommendation.
The
report
shall
be
posted
by
the
public
fund
23


on
a
publicly
available
internet
site
of
the
public
fund.
24


3.
Subsection
1
does
not
apply
if
the
public
fund
determines
25


that
no
economically
practicable
alternative
is
available.
26


Sec.
5.
NEW
SECTION


.
12K.4
Public
entities
——
contract


27


requirements.
28


1.
A
public
entity
shall
not
enter
into
a
contract
of
one
29


thousand
dollars
or
more
with
a
company
that
is
engaged
in
an
30


economic
boycott
to
acquire
or
dispose
of
services,
supplies,
31


information
technology,
or
construction.
32


2.
A
contract
subject
to
the
requirements
of
this
section
33


shall
contain
a
written
verification
from
the
company
that
it
34


does
not
engage
in
economic
boycotts
and
will
not
engage
in
35


-4-


LSB
1119YH
(6)
90


ec/rn
4/
10





H.F.
2


economic
boycotts
during
the
term
of
the
contract
and
shall
1


further
provide
for
cancellation
of
the
contract
if
the
public
2


entity
has
reasonable
cause
to
believe
based
on
explanatory
3


evidence
that
the
company
is
engaging
in
an
economic
boycott.
4


3.
This
section
shall
not
apply
if
the
public
entity
5


determines
that
the
requirements
of
this
section
would
6


otherwise
be
inconsistent
with
the
public
entity’s
7


constitutional
or
statutory
duties
or
would
prevent
the
public
8


entity
from
obtaining
the
supplies
or
services
to
be
provided
9


in
an
economically
practicable
manner.
10


Sec.
6.
NEW
SECTION


.
12K.5
Enforcement.
11


1.
This
chapter,
or
any
contract
subject
to
this
chapter,
12


may
be
enforced
by
the
attorney
general.
13


2.
If
the
attorney
general
has
reasonable
cause
to
believe
14


that
a
person
has
engaged
in,
is
engaging
in,
or
is
about
to
15


engage
in
a
violation
of
this
chapter,
the
attorney
general
may
16


do
any
of
the
following:
17


a.
Require
such
person
to
file
on
such
forms
as
the
attorney
18


general
prescribes
a
statement
or
report
in
writing,
under
19


oath,
as
to
all
the
facts
and
circumstances
concerning
the
20


violation,
and
such
other
data
and
information
as
the
attorney
21


general
may
deem
necessary.
22


b.
Examine
under
oath
any
person
in
connection
with
the
23


violation.
24


c.
Examine
any
record,
book,
document,
account,
or
paper
as
25


the
attorney
general
may
deem
necessary.
26


d.
Pursuant
to
a
court
order,
impound
any
record,
book,
27


document,
account,
paper,
or
sample
or
material
relating
to
28


such
practice
and
retain
the
same
in
the
possession
of
the
29


attorney
general
until
the
completion
of
all
proceedings
30


undertaken
under
this
chapter
or
in
the
courts.
31


Sec.
7.
Section
35A.13,
subsection
4,
paragraph
a,
Code
32


2023,
is
amended
to
read
as
follows:
33


a.
Notwithstanding
subsection
5
,
moneys
in
the
fund,
except
34


so
much
of
the
fund
as
may
be
necessary
to
be
kept
on
hand
35


-5-


LSB
1119YH
(6)
90


ec/rn
5/
10





H.F.
2


for
the
making
of
disbursements
under
this
section
,
shall
1


be
invested
by
the
treasurer
of
state,
in
consultation
with
2


the
commission
and
the
public
retirement
systems
committee
3


established
by
section
97D.4
,
in
any
investments
authorized
for
4


the
Iowa
public
employees’
retirement
system
in
section
97B.7A
,
5


including
common
stock,
and
subject
to
the
requirements
of
6


chapters
12F
,
12H
,
and


12J
,
and
12K,
and
the
earnings
therefrom
7


shall
be
credited
to
the
fund.
The
treasurer
of
state
may
8


execute
contracts
and
agreements
with
investment
advisors,
9


consultants,
and
investment
management
and
benefit
consultant
10


firms
in
the
administration
of
investments
of
moneys
in
the
11


fund.
12


Sec.
8.
Section
97A.7,
subsection
1,
Code
2023,
is
amended
13


to
read
as
follows:
14


1.
The
board
of
trustees
shall
be
the
trustees
of
the
15


retirement
fund
created
by
this
chapter
as
provided
in
section
16


97A.8
and
shall
have
full
power
to
invest
and
reinvest
funds
17


subject
to
the
terms,
conditions,
limitations,
and
restrictions
18


imposed
by
subsection
2
and
chapters
12F
,
12H
,
and


12J
,
and
19


12K
and
subject
to
like
terms,
conditions,
limitations,
and
20


restrictions
said
trustees
shall
have
full
power
to
hold,
21


purchase,
sell,
assign,
transfer,
or
dispose
of
any
of
the
22


securities
and
investments
of
the
retirement
fund
which
have
23


been
invested,
as
well
as
of
the
proceeds
of
said
investments
24


and
any
moneys
belonging
to
the
retirement
fund.
The
board
25


of
trustees
may
authorize
the
treasurer
of
state
to
exercise
26


any
of
the
duties
of
this
section
.
When
so
authorized
the
27


treasurer
of
state
shall
report
any
transactions
to
the
board
28


of
trustees
at
its
next
monthly
meeting.
29


Sec.
9.
Section
97B.4,
subsection
5,
Code
2023,
is
amended


30


to
read
as
follows:
31


5.
Investments.
The
system,
through
the
chief
investment
32


officer,
shall
invest,
subject
to
chapters
12F
,
12H
,
and


12J
,
33


and
12K


and
in
accordance
with
the
investment
policy
and
34


goal
statement
established
by
the
board,
the
portion
of
the
35


-6-


LSB
1119YH
(6)
90


ec/rn
6/
10












H.F.
2


retirement
fund
which,
in
the
judgment
of
the
system,
is
not
1


needed
for
current
payment
of
benefits
under
this
chapter
2


subject
to
the
requirements
of
section
97B.7A
.
3


Sec.
10.
Section
262.14,
unnumbered
paragraph
1,
Code
2023,
4


is
amended
to
read
as
follows:
5


The
board
may
invest
funds
belonging
to
the
institutions,
6


subject
to
chapters
12F
,
12H
,
and


12J
,
and
12K
and
the
7


following
regulations:
8


Sec.
11.
Section
411.7,
subsection
1,
Code
2023,
is
amended
9


to
read
as
follows:
10


1.
The
board
of
trustees
is
the
trustee
of
the
fire
11


and
police
retirement
fund
created
in
section
411.8
and
12


shall
annually
establish
an
investment
policy
to
govern
the
13


investment
and
reinvestment
of
the
moneys
in
the
fund,
subject
14


to
the
terms,
conditions,
limitations,
and
restrictions
15


imposed
by
subsection
2
and
chapters
12F
,
12H
,
and


12J
,
and
16


12K
.
Subject
to
like
terms,
conditions,
limitations,
and
17


restrictions
the
system
has
full
power
to
hold,
purchase,
sell,
18


assign,
transfer,
or
dispose
of
any
of
the
securities
and
19


investments
in
which
the
fund
has
been
invested,
as
well
as
of
20


the
proceeds
of
the
investments
and
any
moneys
belonging
to
the
21


fund.
22


Sec.
12.
NEW
SECTION


.
524.906
Improper
considerations.
23


A
state
bank
shall
not
take
into
account
improper
financial
24


factors,
as
defined
in
section
12K.2,
in
determining
whether
25


to
make
a
loan.
26


Sec.
13.
Section
533.315,
Code
2023,
is
amended
by
adding
27


the
following
new
subsection:
28


NEW
SUBSECTION
.
2A.
Improper
considerations.
A
state
29


credit
union
shall
not
take
into
account
improper
financial
30


factors,
as
defined
in
section
12K.2,
in
determining
whether
31


to
make
a
loan.


32


Sec.
14.
Section
602.9111,
subsection
1,
Code
2023,
is


33


amended
to
read
as
follows:
34


1.
So
much
of
the
judicial
retirement
fund
as
may
not
be
35


-7-


LSB
1119YH
(6)
90


ec/rn
7/
10











H.F.
2


necessary
to
be
kept
on
hand
for
the
making
of
disbursements
1


under
this
article
shall
be
invested
by
the
treasurer
of
2


state
in
any
investments
authorized
for
the
Iowa
public
3


employees’
retirement
system
in
section
97B.7A
and
subject
to
4


the
requirements
of
chapters
12F
,
12H
,
and
12J
,
and
12K,
and
5


the
earnings
therefrom
shall
be
credited
to
the
fund.
The
6


treasurer
of
state
may
execute
contracts
and
agreements
with
7


investment
advisors,
consultants,
and
investment
management
and
8


benefit
consultant
firms
in
the
administration
of
the
judicial
9


retirement
fund.
10


Sec.
15.
EFFECTIVE
DATE.
This
Act,
being
deemed
of
11


immediate
importance,
takes
effect
upon
enactment.
12


Sec.
16.
APPLICABILITY.
This
Act
applies
to
contracts
and
13


loans
entered
into
on
or
after
the
effective
date
of
this
Act.
14


EXPLANATION
15


The
inclusion
of
this
explanation
does
not
constitute
agreement
with
16


the
explanation’s
substance
by
the
members
of
the
general
assembly.
17


This
bill
relates
to
public
contracts,
public
fund
18


investing,
and
lending
practices
with
certain
companies
that
19


engage
in
economic
boycotts
based
on
environmental,
social,
or
20


governance
criteria.
21


The
bill
creates
new
Code
chapter
12K,
which
restricts
22


the
treasurer
of
state,
the
state
board
of
regents,
the
Iowa
23


public
employees’
retirement
system
(IPERS),
the
public
safety
24


peace
officers’
retirement
system,
the
statewide
fire
and
25


police
retirement
system,
and
the
judicial
retirement
system,
26


defined
as
“public
funds”,
from
entering
into
agreements
with
27


investment
managers
or
proxy
advisors
that
take
action
based
28


upon
improper
financial
factors
relating
to
economic
boycotts
29


based
on
environmental,
social,
or
governance
criteria
and
30


not
solely
on
the
financial
interest
of
participants
and
31


beneficiaries
of
the
public
fund.
The
bill
also
prevents
all
32


public
entities,
including
the
state
and
political
subdivisions
33


of
the
state,
from
entering
into
a
contract
with
a
company
34


of
$1,000
or
more
engaged
in
an
economic
boycott
based
on
35


-8-


LSB
1119YH
(6)
90


ec/rn
8/
10






H.F.
2


environmental,
social,
or
governance
criteria.
1


The
bill
defines
company,
economic
boycott,
explanatory
2


evidence,
improper
financial
factors,
investment
advisor,
3


protected
company,
public
entity,
and
public
fund.
The
bill
4


defines
company
as
any
profit-making
business
entity
with
at
5


least
10
full-time
employees.
A
protected
company
is
defined
6


to
include
companies
engaged
in
fossil
fuel-based
energy,
7


timber,
mining,
agriculture,
firearms,
firearm
parts,
firearm
8


accessories,
or
ammunition
activities;
and
companies
that
do
9


not
or
will
not
commit
to
meet,
beyond
what
is
required
by
10


law,
environmental
standards
or
disclosure
criteria,
corporate
11


board
and
employment,
composition,
compensation,
or
disclosure
12


criteria
that
incorporate
characteristics
protected
in
this
13


state
under
the
Iowa
civil
rights
Act,
or
to
facilitate
14


access
to
abortion,
sex
or
gender
change,
or
transgender
15


surgery.
The
bill
defines
economic
boycott
as
taking
adverse
16


action
intended
to
penalize
a
protected
company.
Improper
17


financial
considerations
is
defined
to
mean
taking
any
action
18


or
considering
any
factor,
beyond
what
controlling
federal
or
19


state
law
requires,
with
a
purpose
to
further
environmental,
20


social,
or
governance
goals
related
to
those
characteristics
of
21


a
protected
company
under
the
bill.
22


As
to
public
funds,
the
bill
prevents
a
public
fund
from
23


granting
proxy
voting
authority
to
a
person
or
entering
into
24


an
agreement
with
an
investment
advisor
unless
the
person
or
25


investment
advisor
commits
in
writing
to
act
solely
in
the
26


financial
interest
of
participants
and
beneficiaries
of
the
27


public
fund
and
not
based
upon
improper
financial
factors.
The
28


bill
also
requires
information
on
all
proxy
votes
on
behalf
of
29


a
public
fund
to
be
posted
on
a
publicly
available
internet
30


site
of
the
public
fund.
Finally,
the
bill
provides
that
the
31


restrictions
on
a
public
fund
do
not
apply
if
the
public
fund
32


determines
that
no
economically
practicable
alternative
is
33


available.


34


As
to
public
entities,
the
bill
prevents
all
public
entities
35


-9-


LSB
1119YH
(6)
90


ec/rn
9/
10




H.F.
2


from
entering
into
a
contract
with
a
company
of
$1,000
or
more
1


that
is
engaged
in
an
economic
boycott.
The
bill
requires
any
2


contract
with
a
company
subject
to
this
provision
to
contain
3


a
written
verification
from
the
company
that
it
does
not
4


engage
in
economic
boycotts
and
will
not
engage
in
economic
5


boycotts
during
the
term
of
the
contract
and
shall
further
6


provide
for
cancellation
of
the
contract
if
the
public
entity
7


has
reasonable
cause
to
believe
based
on
explanatory
evidence
8


that
the
company
is
engaging
in
an
economic
boycott.
The
bill
9


provides
that
these
requirements
shall
not
apply
if
the
public
10


entity
determines
that
the
requirements
of
this
Code
section
11


would
otherwise
be
inconsistent
with
the
public
entity’s
12


constitutional
or
statutory
duties
or
would
prevent
the
public
13


entity
from
obtaining
the
supplies
or
services
to
be
provided
14


in
an
economically
practicable
manner.
15


The
bill
provides
that
the
attorney
general
shall
enforce
16


the
requirements
of
this
new
Code
chapter.
17


Code
chapters
524
and
533,
governing
state
banks
and
credit
18


unions,
are
amended
to
restrict
banks
and
credit
unions
from
19


utilizing
improper
financial
factors,
as
defined
by
the
bill,
20


in
determining
whether
to
make
a
loan.
21


The
bill
makes
conforming
changes
to
Code
sections
12.8,
22


35A.13,
97A.7,
97B.4,
262.14,
411.7,
and
602.9111.
23


The
bill
takes
effect
upon
enactment
and
applies
to
24


contracts
and
loans
entered
into
on
or
after
the
effective
date
25


of
the
bill.
26


-10-


LSB
1119YH
(6)
90


ec/rn
10/
10




SENATE, No. 3076 

STATE OF NEW JERSEY
220th LEGISLATURE
  
INTRODUCED SEPTEMBER 29, 2022
 




 
Sponsored by:
Senator  EDWARD DURR
District 3 (Cumberland, Gloucester and Salem)
 
 
 
 
SYNOPSIS
     Establishes "Child Protection and Anti-Mutilation
Act." 
 
CURRENT VERSION OF TEXT 
     As introduced.
   




An Act concerning the protection of children and
supplementing Title 45 of the Revised Statutes.
 
     Be It
Enacted by the Senate and General Assembly of
the State of New Jersey:
 
     1. This act shall be known and
may be cited as the "Child Protection and Anti-Mutilation Act."
 
     2.    a.  As used in this
section:
     "Minor" means any
unemancipated person under the age of 18. 
     "Sex" means the biological
state of being male or female, based on the individual's sex organs,
chromosomes, and endogenous hormone profiles. 
     b.    Notwithstanding the provision
of any law to the contrary, and except as provided in subsection c. of this
section, no person shall engage in with respect to, perform upon, or cause any
of the following practices to be performed upon, a minor: 
     (1)   prescribing or
administering puberty blocking medication to stop or delay normal puberty; 
     (2)   prescribing or
administering supraphysiologic doses of testosterone or other androgens to
females; 
     (3)   prescribing or
administering supraphysiologic doses of estrogen to males;
     (4)   performing surgeries
that result in sterilization, including, but not limited to, castration,
vasectomy, hysterectomy, oophorectomy, orchiectomy, and penectomy;
     (5)   performing surgeries
that artificially construct tissue with the appearance of genitalia that
differs from the individual's sex, including, but not limited to,
metoidioplasty, phalloplasty, and vaginoplasty; or
     (6)   removing any healthy or
non-diseased body part or tissue, except in the case of a male circumcision. 
     c.     The provisions of
subsection b. of this section shall not apply to procedures undertaken to treat
a minor with a medically verifiable disorder of sex development, including: 
     (1)   an individual with
external biological sex characteristics that are irresolvably ambiguous,
including an individual with 46 XX chromosomes with virilization, an individual
with 46 XY chromosomes with under virilization, or an individual having both
ovarian and testicular tissue; or
     (2)   an individual diagnosed
by a physician with a disorder of sexual development, in which the physician
has determined, through genetic or biochemical testing, that the person does
not have normal sex chromosome structure, sex steroid hormone production, or
sex steroid hormone action for a male or female. 
     d.    A person who violates
the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a crime of the third degree.
     3.    The Director of the
Division of Consumer Affairs in the Department of Law and Public Safety and the
Commissioner of Health shall each adopt rules and regulations, pursuant to the
"Administrative Procedure Act," P.L.1968, c.410 (C.52:14B-1 et seq.), as
necessary to implement the provisions of this act.
 
     4.    This act shall take
effect immediately.
 
 
STATEMENT
 
     This bill establishes the "Child
Protection and Anti-Mutilation Act."
     The bill prohibits any person
from, with regard to an unemancipated person under 18 years of age, engaging
in, performing, or causing to be performed the following practices:
     1) prescribing or
administering puberty blocking medication to stop or delay normal puberty; 
     2) prescribing or
administering supraphysiologic doses of testosterone or other androgens to
females; 
     3) prescribing or
administering supraphysiologic doses of estrogen to males;
     4) performing surgeries that
result in sterilization, including, but not limited to, castration, vasectomy,
hysterectomy, oophorectomy, orchiectomy, and penectomy;
     5) performing surgeries that
artificially construct tissue with the appearance of genitalia that differs from
the individual's sex, including, but not limited to, metoidioplasty, phalloplasty,
and vaginoplasty; or
     6)    removing any healthy or
non-diseased body part or tissue, except in the case of a male circumcision. 
     The restrictions established
under the bill will not apply to procedures undertaken to treat a minor with a
medically verifiable disorder of sex development, including:  an individual with
external biological sex characteristics that are irresolvably ambiguous or an
individual diagnosed by a physician with a disorder of sexual development, in
which the physician has determined, through genetic or biochemical testing,
that the person does not have normal sex chromosome structure, sex steroid
hormone production, or sex steroid hormone action for a male or female. 
     A person who violates the
provisions of the bill will be guilty of a crime of the third degree, which is
punishable by imprisonment for three to five years, a fine of up to $15,000, or
both.



ASSEMBLY, No. 1418 

STATE OF NEW JERSEY
220th LEGISLATURE
  
PRE-FILED FOR INTRODUCTION IN THE 2022 SESSION
 




 
Sponsored by:
Assemblyman  ROBERT AUTH
District 39 (Bergen and Passaic)
 
Co-Sponsored by:
Assemblymen Peterson, Scharfenberger, Catalano, McGuckin
and DiMaio
 
 
 
 
SYNOPSIS
     Provides that public school parent who objects to
learning material or activity that parent considers harmful may receive voucher
from school district to enroll student in nonpublic school. 
 
CURRENT VERSION OF TEXT 
     Introduced Pending Technical Review by Legislative
Counsel.
   




An Act concerning vouchers for certain public school students
and supplementing chapter 35 of Title 18A of the New Jersey Statutes.
 
     Be It
Enacted by the Senate and General Assembly of
the State of New Jersey:
 
     1.    In the event that the
parent or guardian of a student enrolled in a school district objects to a
learning material or activity that is part of the curriculum, on the basis that
the material or activity is harmful, withdraws his child from the school
district and enrolls the child in a nonpublic school, the resident school
district shall provide the parent or guardian with a voucher to support the
tuition and fees of the nonpublic school.  The voucher shall equal 75 percent
of the resident school district's annual spending per pupil prorated based upon
the number of days remaining in the school year.
     An objection to a learning
material or activity on the basis that it is harmful includes, but is not
limited to, an objection that the material or activity questions, violates, or
conflicts with the parent or guardian's belief or practice regarding sex,
sexuality, sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, conscience,
ethics, morality, or religion.
 
     2.    This act shall take
effect immediately.
 
 
STATEMENT
 
     This bill provides that in the
event that the parent or guardian of a student enrolled in a school district
objects to a learning material or activity that is part of the curriculum, on
the basis that the material or activity is harmful, withdraws his child from
the school district and enrolls the child in a nonpublic school, the resident
school district is required to provide the parent or guardian with a voucher to
support the tuition and fees of the nonpublic school.  The voucher will equal
75 percent of the resident school district's annual spending per pupil prorated
based upon the number of days remaining in the school year.
     An objection to a learning
material or activity on the basis that it is harmful includes, but is not
limited to, an objection that the material or activity questions, violates, or
conflicts with the parent or guardian's belief or practice regarding sex,
sexuality, sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, conscience,
ethics, morality, or religion.




Senate
File
83
-
Introduced


SENATE
FILE
83


BY
J.
TAYLOR
,
GUTH
,
LOFGREN
,


GARRETT
,
WESTRICH
,
ROWLEY
,


ZAUN
,
SALMON
,
ROZENBOOM
,


GREEN
,
EVANS
,
DE
WITT
,


ALONS
,
SWEENEY
,
REICHMAN
,


and
COURNOYER


A
BILL
FOR


An
Act
relating
to
instruction
relating
to
gender
identity
in
1


the
curriculum
provided
to
students
enrolled
in
kindergarten
2


through
grade
eight
in
school
districts,
accredited
3


nonpublic
schools,
and
charter
schools
and
creating
a
4


private
cause
of
action.
5


BE
IT
ENACTED
BY
THE
GENERAL
ASSEMBLY
OF
THE
STATE
OF
IOWA:
6


TLSB
1325XS
(6)
90


jda/jh




S.F.
83


Section
1.
Section
256.11,
subsections
2,
3,
and
4,
Code
1


2023,
are
amended
to
read
as
follows:
2


2.
The
kindergarten
program
shall
include
experiences
3


designed
to
develop
healthy
emotional
and
social
habits
and
4


growth
in
the
language
arts
and
communication
skills,
as
well
5


as
a
capacity
for
the
completion
of
individual
tasks,
and
6


protect
and
increase
physical
well-being
with
attention
given
7


to
experiences
relating
to
the
development
of
life
skills
8


and
human
growth
and
development.
A
kindergarten
teacher
9


shall
be
licensed
to
teach
in
kindergarten.
An
accredited
10


nonpublic
school
must
meet
the
requirements
of
this
subsection
11


only
if
the
nonpublic
school
offers
a
kindergarten
program.
12


The
curriculum
provided
to
students
in
accordance
with
this


13


subsection
shall
not
include
instruction
relating
to
gender


14


identity
as
defined
in
section
216.2.
15


3.
The
following
areas
shall
be
taught
in
grades
one
through
16


six:
English-language
arts,
social
studies,
mathematics,
17


science,
health,
age-appropriate
and
research-based
human
18


growth
and
development,
physical
education,
traffic
safety,
19


music,
and
visual
art.
Computer
science
instruction
20


incorporating
the
standards
established
under
section
256.7,
21


subsection
26
,
paragraph
“a”
,
subparagraph
(4),
shall
be
22


offered
in
at
least
one
grade
level
commencing
with
the
school
23


year
beginning
July
1,
2023.
The
health
curriculum
shall
24


include
the
characteristics
of
communicable
diseases
including
25


acquired
immune
deficiency
syndrome.
The
state
board
as
part
26


of
accreditation
standards
shall
adopt
curriculum
definitions
27


for
implementing
the
elementary
program.
The
curriculum


28


provided
to
students
in
accordance
with
this
subsection
shall
29


not
include
instruction
relating
to
gender
identity
as
defined


30


in
section
216.2.
31


4.
The
following
shall
be
taught
in
grades
seven
and
32


eight:
English-language
arts;
social
studies;
mathematics;
33


science;
health;
age-appropriate
and
research-based
human
34


growth
and
development;
career
exploration
and
development;
35


-1-


LSB
1325XS
(6)
90


jda/jh


1/
3











S.F.
83


physical
education;
music;
and
visual
art.
Computer
science
1


instruction
incorporating
the
standards
established
under
2


section
256.7,
subsection
26
,
paragraph
“a”
,
subparagraph
(4),
3


shall
be
offered
in
at
least
one
grade
level
commencing
with
4


the
school
year
beginning
July
1,
2023.
Career
exploration
5


and
development
shall
be
designed
so
that
students
are
6


appropriately
prepared
to
create
an
individual
career
7


and
academic
plan
pursuant
to
section
279.61
,
incorporate
8


foundational
career
and
technical
education
concepts
aligned
9


with
the
six
career
and
technical
education
service
areas
10


as
defined
in
subsection
5
,
paragraph
“h”
,
and
incorporate
11


relevant
twenty-first
century
skills.
The
health
curriculum
12


shall
include
age-appropriate
and
research-based
information
13


regarding
the
characteristics
of
sexually
transmitted
diseases,
14


including
HPV
and
the
availability
of
a
vaccine
to
prevent
15


HPV,
and
acquired
immune
deficiency
syndrome.
The
state
board
16


as
part
of
accreditation
standards
shall
adopt
curriculum
17


definitions
for
implementing
the
program
in
grades
seven
18


and
eight.
However,
this
subsection
shall
not
apply
to
the
19


teaching
of
career
exploration
and
development
in
nonpublic
20


schools.
For
purposes
of
this
section
,
“age-appropriate”
,
21


“HPV”
,
and
“research-based”
mean
the
same
as
defined
in
section
22


279.50
.
The
curriculum
provided
to
students
in
accordance


23


with
this
subsection
shall
not
include
instruction
relating
to
24


gender
identity
as
defined
in
section
216.2.
25


Sec.
2.
NEW
SECTION
.
280.33
Instruction
related
to
gender
26


identity
——
private
cause
of
action.
27


1.
A
parent
or
guardian
of
a
student
alleging
a
violation
28


of
the
prohibition
against
providing
curriculum
that
includes
29


instruction
relating
to
gender
identity
provided
in
section
30


256.11,
subsection
2,
3,
or
4,
may
bring
a
civil
action
31


for
injunctive
relief
against
a
school
district,
accredited
32


nonpublic
school,
or
charter
school
to
prohibit
the
school
33


district,
accredited
nonpublic
school,
or
charter
school
from
34


continuing
such
violation.
35


-2-


LSB
1325XS
(6)
90


jda/jh


2/
3








S.F.
83


2.
If
a
parent
or
guardian
is
the
prevailing
party
in
a
1


civil
action
instituted
pursuant
to
subsection
1,
the
court
2


shall
award
reasonable
court
costs
and
attorney
fees
to
the
3


parent
or
guardian.
4


EXPLANATION
5


The
inclusion
of
this
explanation
does
not
constitute
agreement
with
6


the
explanation’s
substance
by
the
members
of
the
general
assembly.
7


This
bill
establishes
that
the
curriculum
utilized
in
8


kindergarten
through
grade
eight
by
a
school
district,
9


accredited
nonpublic
school,
or
charter
school
in
accordance
10


with
the
state’s
educational
standards
shall
not
include
11


instruction
relating
to
gender
identity.
“Gender
identity”,
12


for
purposes
of
the
bill,
means
a
gender-related
identity
of
a
13


person,
regardless
of
the
person’s
assigned
sex
at
birth.
14


The
bill
provides
that
if
a
school
district,
accredited
15


nonpublic
school,
or
charter
school
violates
this
prohibition,
16


a
parent
or
guardian
of
a
student
may
bring
a
civil
action
17


for
injunctive
relief
against
the
school
district,
accredited
18


nonpublic
school,
or
charter
school
to
prohibit
the
school
19


district,
accredited
nonpublic
school,
or
charter
school
from
20


continuing
such
violation.
The
bill
also
provides
that
if
the
21


parent
or
guardian
is
the
prevailing
party
in
this
action,
the
22


court
shall
award
reasonable
court
costs
and
attorney
fees
to
23


the
parent
or
guardian.
24


-3-


LSB
1325XS
(6)
90


jda/jh


3/
3





House
File
325
-
Introduced


HOUSE
FILE
325


BY
SHIPLEY


A
BILL
FOR


An
Act
relating
to
gender
identity
and
sex
under
the
Iowa
civil
1


rights
Act.
2


BE
IT
ENACTED
BY
THE
GENERAL
ASSEMBLY
OF
THE
STATE
OF
IOWA:
3


TLSB
1427YH
(4)
90


cm/ns




H.F.
325


Section
1.
Section
216.2,
subsection
10,
Code
2023,
is
1


amended
to
read
as
follows:
2


10.
“Gender
identity”
means
a
gender-related
identity
of
a
3


person
,
regardless
of
the
person’s
assigned
sex
at
birth


who
4


has
attained
the
age
of
majority


.
5


Sec.
2.
Section
216.2,
Code
2023,
is
amended
by
adding
the
6


following
new
subsection:
7


NEW
SUBSECTION


.
13A.
“Sex”
means
the
biological
sex
8


designation
of
female
or
male
on
a
person’s
birth
certificate,
9


characterized
by
reproductive
anatomy
and
chromosomes.
10


Sec.
3.
NEW
SECTION


.
216.23
Gender
exceptions.
11


Notwithstanding
any
other
provision
of
law
to
the
contrary,
12


with
respect
to
gender
accommodations
provided
to
a
person
13


whose
gender
identity
is
not
the
same
as
the
person’s
sex,
14


an
accommodation
for
the
person
shall
not
be
made
if
the
15


accommodation
places
an
undue
burden
on
another
person
whose
16


gender
identity
is
the
same
as
the
person’s
sex.
17


EXPLANATION
18


The
inclusion
of
this
explanation
does
not
constitute
agreement
with
19


the
explanation’s
substance
by
the
members
of
the
general
assembly.
20


This
bill
relates
to
gender
identity
and
sex
under
the
21


Iowa
civil
rights
Act.
The
bill
amends
the
definition
of
22


“gender
identity”
to
only
include
persons
who
have
reached
the
23


age
of
majority.
The
bill
defines
“sex”
as
the
biological
24


sex
designation
on
a
person’s
birth
certificate.
The
sex
25


designation
is
determined
by
reproductive
anatomy
and
26


chromosomes
of
a
person.
27


The
bill
provides
in
instances
where
there
is
a
conflict
28


of
accommodation
between
a
person
who
identifies
with
the
sex
29


designation
given
at
birth
and
a
person
who
does
not,
the
30


person
who
identifies
with
the
sex
designation
given
at
birth
31


shall
not
be
unduly
burdened
by
the
accommodation
made
for
the
32


person
who
does
not
identify
with
the
sex
designation
given
to
33


the
person
at
birth.
34


-1-


LSB
1427YH
(4)
90


cm/ns
1/
1









SENATE, No. 589 

STATE OF NEW JERSEY
220th LEGISLATURE
  
PRE-FILED FOR INTRODUCTION IN THE 2022 SESSION
 




 
Sponsored by:
Senator  MICHAEL L. TESTA, JR.
District 1 (Atlantic, Cape May and Cumberland)
Senator  JAMES W. HOLZAPFEL
District 10 (Ocean)
 
 
 
 
SYNOPSIS
     "Fairness in Women's Sports Act." 
 
CURRENT VERSION OF TEXT 
     Introduced Pending Technical Review by Legislative Counsel.
   




An Act concerning student participation in school-sanctioned
sporting events and supplementing chapter 11 of Title 18A of the New Jersey
Statutes.
 
     Be It
Enacted by the Senate and General Assembly of
the State of New Jersey:
 
     1.    The Legislature finds
and declares that:
     a.     In United States v.
Virginia, 518 U.S.515, 533 (1996), the Supreme Court noted that there are
"inherent differences between men and women," and these differences "remain
cause for celebration, but not for denigration of the members of either sex or
for artificial constraints on an individual's opportunity."
     b.    These "inherent
differences" range from chromosomal and hormonal differences to physiological
differences.
     c.     Men generally have
denser and stronger bones, tendons, and ligaments as well as larger hearts,
greater lung volume per body mass, a higher red blood cell count, and higher
hemoglobin.
     d.    Men also have higher
natural levels of testosterone, which affects traits such as hemoglobin levels,
body fat content, the storage and use of carbohydrates, and the development of
type 2 muscle fibers, all of which result in men being able to generate higher
speed and power during physical activity.
     e.     While classifications
based on sex are generally disfavored, the court in United States v. Virginia
also recognized that "sex classifications may be used to compensate women for
particular economic disabilities [they have] suffered, to promote equal
employment opportunity, [and] to advance full development of the talent and
capacities of our Nation's people."
     f.     One place where sex
classifications allow for the "full development of the talent and capacities of
our Nation's people" is in the context of sports and athletics.
     g.    The biological differences
between females and males, especially as they relate to natural levels of
testosterone, help to explain the male and female secondary sex characteristics
which develop during puberty and have lifelong effects, including those most
important for success in sports such as strength, speed, and endurance.
     h.    Courts have recognized
that the inherent, physiological differences between males and females result
in different athletic capabilities.
     i.     Specifically, the
courts have noted that males and females are not similarly situated in athletic
competition due to innate physiological differences and that males generally
possess physiological advantages over their female competitors.
     j.     A recent study of
female and male Olympic performances since 1983 found that, although athletes
from both sexes improved over the time span, the "gender gap" between female
and male performances remained stable. This suggests that women's performances
at the high level will never match those of men.
     k.    The benefits that
natural testosterone provides to male athletes is not diminished through the
use of puberty blockers and cross-sex hormones. A recent study on the impact of
such treatments found that even after 12 months of hormonal therapy, a man who
identifies as a woman and is taking cross-sex hormones possesses a significant
advantage over female athletes and will still likely have performance benefits
over women.
     l.     Having separate
sex-specific teams furthers efforts to promote sex equality. Sex-specific teams
accomplish this by providing opportunities for female athletes to demonstrate
their skill, strength, and athletic abilities while also providing them with
opportunities to obtain recognition and accolades, college scholarships, and
the numerous other long-term benefits that flow from success in athletic
endeavors.
 
     2.    a.  Interscholastic,
intercollegiate, intramural, or club athletic teams or sports that are sponsored
by a public or nonpublic school that is a member of the New Jersey State
Interscholastic Athletic Association (NJSIAA), or a public institution of
higher education or any higher education institution that is a member of the
national collegiate athletic association (NCAA), national association of
intercollegiate athletics (NAIA), or national junior college athletic
association (NJCAA) shall be expressly designated as one of the following based
on biological sex:
     (1)   males, men, or boys;
     (2)   females, women, or
girls; or
     (3)   coed or mixed.
     b.    Athletic teams or sports
designated for females, women, or girls shall not be open to students of the
male sex.  If a student's sex is disputed, a student shall establish sex by
presenting a signed physician's statement that shall indicate the student's sex
based solely on:
     (1)   the student's internal
and external reproductive anatomy;
     (2)   the student's normal
endogenously produced levels of testosterone; and
     (3)   an analysis of the
student's genetic makeup.
 
     3.    A government entity, any
licensing or accrediting organization, or any athletic association or organization
shall not entertain a complaint, open an investigation, or take any other
adverse action against a school or an institution of higher education for
maintaining separate interscholastic, intercollegiate, intramural, or club
athletic teams or sports for students of the female sex.
 
     4.    a.  Any student who is
deprived of an athletic opportunity or suffers any direct or indirect harm as a
result of a violation of this chapter shall have a private cause of action for
injunctive relief, damages, and any other relief available under law against
the school or institution of higher education.
     b.    Any student who is
subject to retaliation or other adverse action by a school, institution of
higher education, or athletic association or organization as a result of reporting
a violation of this chapter to an employee or representative of the school,
institution, or athletic association or organization, or to any State or
federal agency with oversight of schools or institutions of higher education in
the State, shall have a private cause of action for injunctive relief, damages,
and any other relief available under law against the school, institution, or
athletic association or organization.
     c.     Any school or
institution of higher education that suffers any direct or indirect harm as a
result of a violation of this chapter shall have a private cause of action for
injunctive relief, damages, and any other relief available under law against
the government entity, licensing or accrediting organization, or athletic
association or organization.
     d.    All civil actions
permitted under this section shall be initiated within two years after the harm
occurred. Persons or organizations who prevail on a claim brought pursuant to
this section shall be entitled to monetary damages, including for any
psychological, emotional, and physical harm suffered, reasonable attorney's
fees and costs, and any other appropriate relief.
 
     5.  This act shall take effect
immediately.
 
 
STATEMENT
 
     This bill requires that
participation in school-sanctioned sports be based on biological sex at birth. 
It provides that public and nonpublic schools, as well as institutions of
higher education, designate athletic or sports teams on the basis of biological
sex.  The bill also prohibits any athletic teams or sports designated for
females, women, or girls from being open to males.  In the event the sex of a
student is disputed, the student will establish sex by presenting a signed
physician's statement that indicates the student's sex based solely on (1) the
student's internal and external reproductive anatomy; (2) the student's normal
endogenously produced levels of testosterone; and (3) an analysis of the
student's genetic makeup.  A school or institution of higher education would
not be subject to investigation or any adverse action for maintaining separate
athletic teams or sports for students of the female sex. 
     Students who are deprived of
athletic opportunities or suffer any harm as a result of a violation of the
provisions of this bill would have a private cause of action for injunctive
relief, damages, or other legal remedy permitted by law against the school or
institution of higher education.  A student subject to retaliation or any
adverse action by his or her school, institution of higher education, or
athletic association or organization for reporting a violation of the bill
would also have a private right of action against the school, institution of
higher education, or athletic association or organization.  A school or
institution of higher education that suffers any harm as a result of a
violation of this bill would likewise have a private cause of action for
injunctive relief, damages, or other legal remedy permitted by law.  Any
student, school, or institution of higher education able to bring suit under
this bill would be required to bring their claims within two years after the
harm occurred.  Students or organizations that prevail on any claim brought
pursuant to this bill would be entitled to monetary damages, including damages
for any psychological, emotional, and physical harm suffered, reasonable
attorney's fees and costs, and any other appropriate relief.




 



 


 

		By: Harrison
H.B. No. 1029




 


 



 		
			

A BILL TO BE ENTITLED




 
			

AN ACT




 
			
relating to a prohibition on funding for gender reassignment.



 
			
       BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF TEXAS:



 
			
       SECTION 1.  Subtitle F, Title 10, Government Code, is 



 
			
amended by adding Chapter 2275 to read as follows:



 
			
Chapter 2275. Prohibition on Use of Taxpayer Resources



 
			
       Sec. 2275.001.  DEFINITIONS.  In this chapter:



 
			
             (1)  "Gender reassignment" means a medical 



 
			
intervention, including surgery performed for the purpose of 



 
			
altering a person's primary or secondary sex characteristics or 



 
			
drugs or biologicals prescribed for the purpose of altering or 



 
			
maintaining alteration of a person's primary or secondary sex 



 
			
characteristics.



 
			
             (2)  "Intersex person" means an person who:



 
			
                   (A)  has inborn chromosomal, gonadal, genital, or 



 
			
endocrine characteristics, or a combination of those 



 
			
characteristics, that are not suited to the typical definition of 



 
			
male or female or are atypical for the determined sex of the person; 



 
			
or



 
			
                   (B)  is considered by a medical professional to 



 
			
have inborn chromosomal, gonadal, genital, or endocrine 



 
			
characteristics that are ambiguous or atypical for the determined 



 
			
sex of the person.



 
			
       Sec. 2275.002.  PROHIBITION ON USE OF TAXPAYER RESOURCES FOR 



 
			
GENDER REASSIGNMENT.  (a)  No funds authorized or appropriated by 



 
			
State law shall be expended for any gender reassignment.



 
			
       (b)  No funds authorized or appropriated by State law shall 



 
			
be expended for health benefits that covers gender reassignment.



 
			
       (c)  The prohibition in subsection (a) and (b) does not apply 



 
			
to gender reassignment to be performed on an intersex person.



 
			
       SECTION 2.  This Act takes effect immediately if it receives 



 
			
a vote of two-thirds of all the members elected to each house, as 



 
			
provided by Section 39, Article III, Texas Constitution.  If this 



 
			
Act does not receive the vote necessary for immediate effect, this 



 
			
Act takes effect September 1, 2023.








2023-2024 Bill 3827 Text of Previous Version (Jan. 26, 2023) - South Carolina Legislature Online
 

South Carolina General Assembly125th Session, 2023-2024Bill 3827Indicates Matter StrickenIndicates New Matter(Text matches printed bills. Document has been reformatted to meet World Wide Web specifications.)








A bill

TO AMEND THE SOUTH CAROLINA CODE OF LAWS BY ADDING SECTION 59-29-12 SO AS TO PROVIDE STUDENTS IN STATE-FUNDED PLACES OF LEARNING WITH AN EDUCATION FOCUSED ON EXCELLENCE AND INTEGRITY, EQUIP THEM TO THINK INDEPENDENTLY AND CRITICALLY, SUPPORT EDUCATORS BY MAINTAINING A LEARNING AND WORK ENVIRONMENT UNENCUMBERED BY SOCIAL OR POLITICAL ACTIVISM, TREAT STUDENTS AND EMPLOYEES OF SCHOOLS WITH DIGNITY AS UNIQUE INDIVIDUALS WITHOUT STEREOTYPING OR SCAPEGOATING, PROVIDE INSTRUCTION FREE FROM IDEOLOGICAL INDOCTRINATION OR COERCION, FOSTER AND DEFEND INTELLECTUAL INQUIRY AND FREEDOM OF SPEECH AS WELL AS FREEDOM FROM COMPELLED SPEECH, REQUIRE CLEAR DISTINCTIONS BETWEEN THE TEACHING OF THEORY AND FACT, REQUIRE FULL TRANSPARENCY OF CURRICULA, PROTECT THE PRIVACY AND INNOCENCE OF CHILDREN AND GUARD THEM AGAINST OBSCENE AND MATURE MATERIALS, RESPECT THE RIGHTS OF PARENTS AS THEIR child's DECISION-MAKERS FOR HEALTH AND WELL-BEING, INCLUDING EMOTIONAL AND SEXUAL DEVELOPMENT, DEFER TO PARENTS AS THEIR child's PRIMARY SOURCE OF MORAL AND SOCIAL VALUES, ALLOW PARENTS TO OPT OUT OF ACTIVITIES THAT VIOLATE THIS ACT, ESTABLISH A CLEAR PROTOCOL FOR REPORTING VIOLATIONS AND ALLOWING LOCAL ENTITIES TO ADDRESS AND CORRECT ISSUES, AND REQUIRE PRIVACY AND NONDISCLOSURE DURING THE INVESTIGATION PROCESS.

Be it enacted by the General Assembly of the State of South Carolina:

SECTION 1.   Chapter 29, Title 59 of the S.C. Code is amended by adding:

   Section 59-29-12.   (A) It is the intent of the General Assembly that all state-funded education entities, including places of learning, state and local agencies, accreditation entities, overseeing authorities, instructional content providers, and educators, faculty, administrators, and staff:
      (1) strive to provide every student with a well-rounded, rigorous, and high-quality education with a positive focus on excellence and high expectations;
      (2) support and allow educators to focus on effectively teaching subjects and content by maintaining a learning and work environment unencumbered by social or political activism;
      (3) treat students, parents, and colleagues respectfully and equally as unique individuals, refraining from stereotyping or scapegoating others based on personal or group characteristics or political and religious beliefs; 
      (4) encourage and equip students, without employing ideological coercion or indoctrination, to think critically, creatively, and independently;
      (5) foster and defend freedom of intellectual inquiry, freedom of speech, freedom from compelled speech, and freedom of association;
      (6) respect students' freedom to express differing viewpoints without penalty or marginalization, especially on controversial topics;
      (7) provide instruction that is intellectually honest, placed in historical context, and grounded in verifiable facts;
      (8) provide full transparency to parents, legal custodians, and the public about the teaching subjects and instructional materials used to educate students;
      (9) respect the innocence of children by guarding them against obscene and age-inappropriate topics or content, and by protecting their right to privacy; and
      (10) respect the right of, and defer to, parents and legal custodians as the primary decision-makers and source of their children's education in regard to learning morals, ethics, civic responsibilities, social values, political and religious beliefs, emotional or sexual development, health and medical decisions, and sexual and gender beliefs.
   (B) For purposes of this section: 
      (1) "Place of learning" means a public, charter, or private childcare facility, preschool, elementary, middle, secondary, postsecondary school, or institution of higher learning that receives funds or grants that originate from the State of South Carolina, whether in whole or in part, directly from State agencies or indirectly from an intermediary entity.
      (2) "State-funded education entity" (SFEE) means an entity that receives funds or grants that originate from the State of South Carolina, whether in whole or in part, directly from state agencies or indirectly from an intermediary entity, and includes: 
         (a) a place of learning;
         (b) a public or private institution, organization, or business engaged in providing accreditation, licensing, professional development, training services, instructional or reading materials, surveys, questionnaires, screenings, or any supplemental resources such as school or class library content in any format to a place of learning or its employees; or
         (c) an "overseeing authority," which includes a state or local agency, school board, school authorizer or sponsor, board of directors, or similar entity having administrative or oversight duties over entities (a) or (b) above.
      (3) "State Board" means the South Carolina State Board of Education.
      (4) "Harmful to minors" and "sexual activity" have the same meanings as defined in Title 16, Chapter 15, Article 3, in particular Section 16-15-375 except as modified for purposes of this section in subsection (D)(5)(a) below.
   (C) The General Assembly hereby affirms that under the principles enshrined in the Declaration of Independence, United States Constitution, Civil Rights Act of 1964, Constitution of South Carolina, and the South Carolina Human Affairs Law found in Chapter 13, Title 1, the following concepts are discriminatory, violate the Constitutional and statutory rights of individuals, and are contrary and inimical to the intentions enumerated in subsection (A)(1):
      (1) one race or biological sex is inherently superior or inferior to another race or biological sex;
      (2) a group or an individual, by virtue of his or her race, ethnicity, color, biological sex, sexual orientation, national origin, heritage, culture, religion, or political belief is inherently racist, sexist, bigoted, ignorant, biased, fragile, privileged, oppressive, or contributive to any oppression, whether consciously or unconsciously;
      (3) an individual or group should receive adverse or favorable treatment, or be discriminated against solely or partly because of his or her race, ethnicity, color, biological sex, sexual orientation, national origin, heritage, culture, religion, or political belief;
      (4) members of one race, biological sex, color, or ethnicity cannot and should not attempt to treat, relate to, advise, or instruct others without respect to race, biological sex, color, ethnicity, or culture, or that individuals should be separated in accordance with race, color, or ethnicity for purposes of employment, instruction, training, living arrangements, or any other activities;
      (5) an individual's moral character, value, or status, whether wholly or partly, is necessarily determined by his or her race, ethnicity, color, biological sex, national origin, heritage, culture, religion, or political belief;
      (6) an individual, by virtue of his or her race, biological sex, color, ethnicity, or heritage, bears responsibility, or must confess or atone for actions committed in the past by other members of the same race, biological sex, or ethnic group;
      (7) an individual should be made to feel shame, guilt, anguish, or any other form of psychological distress because of his or her race, color, ethnicity, biological sex, national origin, heritage, culture, religion, or political belief;
      (8) traits, behaviors, or concepts such as meritocracy, a hard work ethic, punctuality, use of standard English language, sense of urgency, pursuit of excellence, valuing the written word, individualism, logic, and objectivity are racist or sexist, or were created by a particular race or group to oppress another race or group; and
      (9) an individual must be compelled to affirm, accept, adopt, profess, or adhere to concepts, forms of language, or definitions not firmly and widely established, empirically or scientifically accurate, or that are controversial or theoretical, such as:
         (a) gender theory, including nonbinary pronouns or honorifics;
         (b) unconscious or implicit bias; or
         (c) that race or biological sex are social constructs;
   (D) A state-funded education entity, including its employees and volunteers, shall not: 
      (1) promote, engage in, or treat individuals in accordance with, the discriminatory concepts of subsection (C);
      (2) direct or otherwise compel individuals to personally affirm, accept, adopt, profess, or adhere to the discriminatory concepts of subsection (C);
      (3) conduct, sponsor, encourage, or require individuals to participate in instruction, presentations, discussions, trainings, questionnaires, surveys, clubs, counseling, or activities that affirm or promote the discriminatory concepts of subsection (C), whether as part of a lesson, assigned or suggested materials made available in any format or setting, conducted on premises, remotely, or by a third party;
      (4) conduct instruction that:
         (a) teaches theoretical ideas or uncorroborated claims as factual;
         (b) materially distorts or misrepresents verifiable historical facts;
         (c) inculcates, coerces, pressures, or encourages students into accepting or affirming a particular ideology or political belief, or participating in social or political activism such as protesting, marching, lobbying, or writing campaigns;
         (d) offers course credit, incentives, or favorable consideration for participating in social or political activism;
         (e) advertises, promotes, or endorses social or political ideologies, causes, movements, organizations, or political candidates;
         (f) creates an atmosphere hostile to open and respectful inquiry and discussion, or that demeans, marginalizes, or penalizes individuals for expressing differing viewpoints, especially about controversial issues;
         (g) promotes or endorses the concept of "equity," defined as treating different individuals or groups unequally to achieve equal or similar outcomes, as this concept violates nondiscriminatory statutes and is contrary to America's foundational underpinnings of equality, equality before the law, and the role of equality in the United States Constitution; or
         (h) promotes or endorses narratives that:
            (i)    the United States was founded for the purpose of oppression, that the American Revolution was fought for the purpose of protecting oppression, or that United States history is a story defined by oppression; or
            (ii) with respect to their relationship to American values, slavery and racism are anything other than deviations from, betrayals of, or failures to live up to, the authentic founding principles of the United States, which include liberty and equality; or
      (5) subjects minors under the age of eighteen to instruction, presentations, displays, performances, discussions, assignments, questionnaires, surveys, or materials in any medium made available in any format or setting, including making access available through online services, school or class libraries, book fairs, or catalogs that violate students' privacy or that involve or contain the following age-inappropriate content, which is reserved for parents and legal custodians to discuss with, and explain to, their children in accordance with their family values and, if they elect to, with health professionals of their choosing:
         (a) sexually explicit or obscene materials in accordance with Article 3, Chapter 15, Title 16, or materials using obscene or profane language in accordance with Chapter 17, Title 16, in particular Section 16-17-530. For purposes of this section, materials shall be considered age-inappropriate and harmful to minors if sexually explicit and obscene content or profane language is present in any portion of the materials; and, claims that when taken as a whole the content has serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value shall not apply and shall not exempt the materials from being considered harmful to minors;
         (b) concepts or instruction on sexual activity, sexual orientation, gender theory, gender identity, gender multiplicity, or gender expression, except as may be needed for exclusively teaching the public health model of sexual risk avoidance education and human biological reproduction as part of a larger unit of study in grades 9 through 12; or
         (c) curricula, initiatives, programs, or activities that:
            (i) undermine, denigrate, question, or minimize the abilities, rights, or role of parents, legal custodians, or family as the primary educators and caregivers of their children;
            (ii) engage in, prompt, suggest, or encourage minors to reveal or discuss personal information in the presence of other students or staff, whether as part of a lesson, discussion, written assignment, club, survey, questionnaire, or any other format or setting. The collection, retention, disclosure, or dissemination of such information about students is strictly prohibited. For purposes of this section, personal information shall mean the student's or student family's:
               (1) political beliefs or affiliations;
               (2) mental, physical, or emotional health or well-being;
               (3) behavior, attitudes, beliefs, observations, or associations about race, ethnicity, skin color, biological sex, gender identity, gender expression, or sexual orientation; 
               (4) illegal, anti-social, self-incriminating, or demeaning behavior;
               (5) legally recognized or analogous relationships, such as those of lawyers, physicians, and ministers;
               (6) religious practices, affiliations, or beliefs; or
               (7) income (other than that required by law to determine eligibility for participation in a program or receiving financial assistance under such program); or
            (iii) engage minors in therapy or psychological interventions whether in a group or as individuals, except for counseling strictly limited to school-related academics, career or course advice, or addressing school disciplinary issues. Such counseling shall be conducted only upon obtaining express written authorization in advance from the minor's parents or legal custodians in which the consent clearly and accurately states the nature, extent, and duration of the counseling;
               (6) withhold from a parent or legal custodian information about any activities, instruction, counseling, or discussions about any subject including mental, emotional, or physical health or well-being; or
               (7) encourage or adopt procedures that have the effect of encouraging a student to withhold from a parent or legal custodian information about any activities, instruction, counseling, or discussions about any subject including mental, emotional, or physical health or well-being.
   (E)(1) Reporting of violations of subsection (D) and enforcement of this section shall occur in the following order:
         (a) Any individual listed in subsection (E)(6), here forth referred to as the complainant, may report alleged violations to the head of the respective SFEE, or his designee. Multiple violations may be submitted in a single report and shall each count as individual violations. To be deemed valid, reports of alleged violations must be submitted in writing and accompanied by documentary, tangible, or testimonial evidence and may not rely on hearsay. The SFEE shall promptly investigate each alleged violation and issue a formal written response to the complainant within fifteen days of receiving his report. Confidentiality of all parties shall be maintained throughout the investigation. The SFEE shall not engage in any adverse treatment of the complainant. If the alleged violation is found valid, the SFEE shall take immediate corrective action, which shall include:
            (i) removing all materials found in violation, discontinuing any such instruction, programs, initiatives, or activities;
            (ii) upon first offense, issuing a written warning to the individual responsible for the violation. Upon a subsequent offense, taking disciplinary action consistent with other employment policy infractions, which shall include as a minimum suspension of duties and up to and including termination depending on the severity of the violation. Violation of this section by an educator shall be considered a violation of the South Carolina Educator's Standards of Conduct that justifies disciplinary sanction by the State Board of Education in accordance with applicable regulations promulgated by the State Board. For the purposes of this section, "educator" means a professional employee of any place of learning whose position requires certification by the State Board and includes administrators and specialists. Violations involving dissemination of materials harmful to minors in subsection (C)(5)(a), shall be enforced in accordance with applicable sections of Article 3, Chapter 15, Title 16;
            (iii) notifying all parents and employees of the SFEE of the violation and corrective action taken. Confidentiality of all parties shall be maintained; and
            (iv) notifying the State Board of the violation and corrective action taken. Confidentiality of the complainant shall be maintained. The State Board shall maintain a record of all such violations and provide an annual written report to the General Assembly indicating the quantity and nature of all violations reported and the SFEEs involved.
         (b) If the complainant or defending party do not agree with the SFEE's determination or if corrective action is not immediately taken, they may appeal to the SFEE's overseeing authority, if one exists, within sixty days of receiving the determination. The overseeing authority shall review the report, maintaining confidentiality of all parties, and issue a formal written response within fifteen days. If the report is found valid, the overseeing authority shall compel the SFEE to take immediate corrective action in accordance with subsection (E)(1)(a).
         (c) If the complainant does not agree with the SFEE's overseeing authority's determination, or if the SFEE does not take immediate corrective action when so directed by the overseeing authority, he may appeal to the State Attorney General within sixty days of receiving the determination. The Attorney General shall, within thirty days of receiving the appeal, investigate the violation report while maintaining confidentiality of all parties. If the Attorney General finds the SFEE violated a provision of this section, he shall issue a written and detailed Notice of Noncompliance to the SFEE and its overseeing authority stating the nature of the violation and results of the investigation. The SFEE shall have fifteen days from receiving the notice to demonstrate compliance through taking corrective action satisfactory to the Attorney General and in accordance with subsection (E)(1)(a), or to dispute the violation in writing. Failure to respond shall be deemed admission of noncompliance. Upon reviewing the entity's response, the Attorney General may dismiss the violation or determine that the noncompliance stands, in which case his office shall file a court action seeking full enforcement under this section. An SFEE found by the court to have violated a provision of this section must, for each violation, lose twenty percent of its state funding including grant amounts, until it demonstrates compliance to the Attorney General. Funding withheld pursuant to this subsection shall be retroactive to the date of Notice of Noncompliance, must be forfeited, and may not be repaid unless the SFEE successfully demonstrates full compliance with this section without further violations for a period of twelve consecutive months after the court's ruling. The loss of funding and grant money pursuant to this subsection must be prorated and returned by the SFEE to the Office of the State Treasurer within forty-five days of the court's ruling. 
         (d) Violation of this section by an educator shall be considered a violation of the South Carolina Educator's Standards of Conduct that justifies disciplinary sanction by the State Board of Education in accordance with its regulations. For the purposes of this section, educator means a professional employee of any place of learning whose position requires certification by the State Board and includes administrators and specialists.
         (e) Students enrolled in a public place of learning up to and including grade twelve that has been determined by a court to be in violation of subsections (C) or (D) and that, as a result, has lost any portion of its state funding or grant money, shall have the right to transfer to another public place of learning within reasonable distance. The students' school transportation, or transportation costs, shall be provided or paid for by the SFEE found to be in violation.
      (2) Funding, loans, grants, assistance of any type, curricula, instructional materials, professional development courses, training, presentations, programs, activities, books, media or resources of any type in any format accepted from federal or other third-party sources, whether public or private, by an SFEE shall be in full compliance with this section. Any violations shall be subject to enforcement in accordance with subsection (E)(1), and additionally, if determined to be in noncompliance, all third-party funding, grants, and resources shall be returned. The South Carolina Department of Education, the State Board, public school districts, and all state government agencies overseeing places of learning are prohibited from accepting any third-party funding or resources that violate subsections (C) or (D).
      (3) Within thirty days after the effective date of this section, an SFEE shall:
         (a) post a notice of this adopted law at a conspicuous location where it will be available to all employees, applicants, students, and parents of students; and
         (b) send an email or letter notification to all its employees, students, and parents of students with the complete text of this law, and subsequently, places of learning shall send such a notification within thirty days of the start of every academic year.
      (4) To ensure transparency of instruction, every place of learning up to and including grade twelve shall:
         (a) within ninety days after the effective date of this section, make readily available to the public on its website and as a printed document upon request, the full list of classes, curricula with lesson units, reading materials, including title, author, and publisher, resources, including online, video or audio materials, field trips, presentations, and materials regardless of media format that are used for student instruction, including primary and reference materials, made available in a library, media center, or online, or provided as staff training, workshop, or professional development. This information must be accessible to the public without requiring registration or use of a user name, password, or other user identification. This information must remain available for each current academic year and the immediately preceding academic year;
         (b) upon request, allow full access to parents or legal custodians of students enrolled in the place of learning to review in person any instructional materials, books, media, content in libraries, media centers, or classroom collections, or materials used in staff professional trainings. Access may be scheduled so as not to disrupt student instruction but shall not be unreasonably denied or delayed; and
         (c) before administering any student questionnaire, survey, or screening form, provide the questionnaire, survey, or screening form to the parent or legal custodian at least fifteen days in advance for their review and obtain their written permission.
      (5) The provisions of this section shall not be construed to prohibit or abridge:
         (a) a person's First Amendment rights to the freedom of speech or to the teaching and free exercise of religion; or
         (b) the impartial teaching or discussion of public policy issues of the day; ideas that individuals may find unwelcome, disagreeable, or offensive; controversial aspects of history; or the historical existence of discriminatory concepts or scientifically unproven theories as part of a larger course of academic instruction, in an age-appropriate, objective, and viewpoint-neutral manner without endorsement.
      (6) During the process described in section (E)(1), the complainant, including any parent or legal custodian of a student, any emancipated minor student or adult student age eighteen or older, and any employee or volunteer of an SFEE shall have the right to refuse, or have his or her child refuse, to participate in any lessons, presentations, trainings, programs, assignments, activities, or be given access to any books, media, or content in any format that he or she believes violate one or more of the concepts or activities described in subsections (C) or (D). In order to exercise their opt-out right, those individuals shall submit a report of violation to the SFEE in accordance with section (E)(1)(a) within ten days of beginning their opt-out. An SFEE shall not subject such individuals or students to any adverse action, demerit, warning, or discipline of any kind unless the process under section (E)(1) or (E)(7) determines a violation has not occurred and the individual continues to refuse to participate afterward. 
      (7)(a) Any person aggrieved by an act prohibited in subsections (C) or (D) may pursue all of the remedies available under South Carolina law, or any other applicable common law or statutory cause of action. A person pursuing a remedy pursuant to this section shall not be subject to any adverse action, demerit, warning, or discipline of any kind by the SFEE for pursuing such legal remedies or submitting a claim to the Attorney General under subsection (E)(1). The following individuals shall have a right to bring an appropriate action before a court of competent jurisdiction in accordance with subsection (E)(1) seeking to enjoin an alleged violation of any provision of subsections (C) and (D) of this code section:
            (i) a student who has reached the age of majority or is a lawfully emancipated minor and who is enrolled at the place of learning where the alleged violation occurred;
            (ii) a parent or custodian of a minor student who is enrolled at the place of learning where the alleged violation occurred;
            (iii) an individual employed or volunteering at any SFEE listed in subsection (B) of this code section where the alleged violation occurred; and
            (iv) the State Attorney General. 
         (b) In any legal action brought pursuant to this subsection, the court may award court costs and reasonable attorney's fees to the prevailing party.
      (8) Within six months of this section becoming law, the State Department of Education shall review and update, as necessary, school counseling frameworks and standards; educator practices and professional conduct principles; and any other student services personnel guidelines, standards, or frameworks in accordance with the requirements of this section.

SECTION 2.   If any section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, clause, phrase, or word of this act is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid, such holding shall not affect the constitutionality or validity of the remaining portions of this act, the General Assembly hereby declaring that it would have passed this act, and each and every section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, clause, phrase, and word thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more other sections, subsections, paragraphs, subparagraphs, sentences, clauses, phrases, or words hereof may be declared to be unconstitutional, invalid, or otherwise ineffective.

SECTION 3.   This act takes effect upon approval by the Governor.
----XX----
This web page was last updated on January 26, 2023 at 10:56 AM




SB 272-FN - AS INTRODUCED  2023 SESSION	23-1062	07/05 SENATE BILL	272-FN AN ACT	establishing a parents' bill of rights in education. SPONSORS:	Sen. Carson, Dist 14; Sen. Avard, Dist 12; Sen. Gannon, Dist 23; Sen. Gray, Dist 6; Sen. Birdsell, Dist 19; Sen. Bradley, Dist 3; Sen. Ward, Dist 8; Sen. Innis, Dist 7; Sen. Murphy, Dist 16; Sen. Ricciardi, Dist 9; Sen. Lang, Dist 2; Sen. Abbas, Dist 22; Sen. Gendreau, Dist 1; Sen. Pearl, Dist 17 COMMITTEE:	Education ----------------------------------------------------------------- ANALYSIS 	This bill establishes a parents' bill of rights, what constitutes a violation of such rights, and a mechanism to notify parents of their rights. - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -  Explanation:	Matter added to current law appears in bold italics.		Matter removed from current law appears [in brackets and struckthrough.]		Matter which is either (a) all new or (b) repealed and reenacted appears in regular type.	23-1062	07/05 STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE In the Year of Our Lord Two Thousand Twenty Three AN ACT	establishing a parents' bill of rights in education. Be it Enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives in General Court convened:  1  Declaration of Purpose.  		I.  The general court finds and reaffirms that parents have a fundamental right and responsibility to direct the upbringing, education, and care of their minor children and that in order to meaningfully and effectively exercise this right, no educational institution may withhold information about a child, the child’s health, the child’s school environment, or the child’s in-school behavior from the child’s parent or parents absent a compelling government interest.		II.  The general court further finds that it is a child’s parents who have the responsibility, means, and resources to ensure that a child receives appropriate health care, social support, religious guidance, and moral inculcation to develop into happy and productive members of society.		III.  Accordingly, the general court further finds that it is necessary to establish a consistent mechanism for parents to be notified of information relating to the health, well-being, and educational progress of their minor children while those children are in the custody and control of the public schools. 2  New Chapter; Parents' Bill of Rights in Education.  Amend RSA by inserting after chapter 189-A the following new chapter:CHAPTER 189-BPARENTS' BILL OF RIGHTS IN EDUCATION	189-B:1  Short Title.  This chapter may be cited as the Parent’s Bill of Rights in Education.	189-B:2  Definitions.  In this chapter:		I.  "Parent" means a person who has legal custody of a minor child as a natural or adoptive parent or a legal guardian, but such term shall not include a parent as to whom the parent-child relationship has been terminated by judicial decree or voluntary relinquishment.		II.  “Minor” means a person under the age of 18 years.		III.  “Compelling state interest” shall include a circumstance in which the school or school personnel have an actual and objectively reasonable belief, supported by clear and convincing evidence, to believe that any action or inaction that impinges upon any of the rights identified in RSA 189-B:3 is likely to cause a child to be abused or neglected as defined in RSA 169-C:3, except that a compelling state interest shall not be found to exist solely because the school or school personnel believe that the child's best interest is served by impinging upon parental rights.		IV.  “School” shall include, without limitation, any school board, school district, school administrative unit, or public charter school. 		V.  “School personnel” shall include any teacher, administrator, employer, or other individual acting in furtherance of or on behalf of any school. 		VI.(a)  “Infringement” for the purposes of this chapter shall include:				(1)  The violation or infringement of any of the rights described in this chapter; 				(2)  The knowing withholding of truthful information required to be disclosed to a child’s parent pursuant to this chapter; 				(3)  The knowing provision of misleading or intentionally inaccurate information required to be disclosed to or forbidden to be withheld from a child’s parent pursuant to this chapter; or				(4)  The denial of the existence of information required to be disclosed to a child’s parent pursuant to this chapter when the information is known to the school or school personnel inquired of by a parent.			(b)  “Infringement” for the purposes of this chapter shall not include:				(1)  The development and implementation of school curricula and/or programming as authorized by New Hampshire law when the disclosures required by this chapter are made.				(2)  The denial of requests by parents that the school district adopt requested curricula and/or programming for a child that is not consistent with properly adopted curricula and/or programming.				(3)  The denial of one or more requests by a parent that the school district permit his or her child to engage in a course of study not approved by the school district, except as specifically permitted by this chapter or required by New Hampshire law.	189-B:3  Parental Rights.		I.  All parental rights are reserved to the parents of minor children in this state without obstruction or interference from any school or school personnel.  The rights of a parent regarding his or her child or children include, but are not limited to, the following:			(a)  The right to direct the upbringing and the moral or religious training of a parent’s minor child.			(b)  The right to direct the education of a parent’s minor child.  This right includes the right to choose to enroll the child in an assigned resident public school, a public charter school, an approved nonpublic school, a home education program, or an Education Freedom Account program, as set forth in RSA 193:1 and RSA 194:F:1, et seq. 			(c)  The right to request that a child be enrolled in a public school other than the public school assigned to them by their residence to avoid a manifest educational hardship, as set forth in RSA 193:3.			(d)  The right to enroll a child in a private school, including a religious school, a home education program, or other available options, as authorized by law, as an alternative to public education, as set forth in RSA 193:1 and RSA 194:F-1, et seq.			(e)  The right to obtain access for a child to public curricular courses and co-curricular programs offered by the local school district where the student resides while choosing to enroll their child in a non-public public chartered, home education or EFA program, as set forth in RSA 193:1-c and RSA 194-F:2(d).			(f)  The right to inspect any instructional material used as part of the educational curriculum for a child within a reasonable period following a request, as set forth in 20 U.S.C. section 1232h(c)(1)(C).			(g)  The right to exempt a minor child from immunizations if, in the opinion of a physician, the immunization is detrimental to the child or because of religious beliefs, as set forth RSA 141-C:20-a and RSA 141-C:20-c.			(h)  The right to exempt a public-school student from participating in required statewide assessments in English, language arts, mathematics, and/or science, as set forth in RSA 193-C:6.			(i)  The right to receive information regarding the level of achievement and academic growth of a child in the state academic assessments in English, language arts, mathematics, and/or science, as set forth in the Every Student Succeeds Act, 20 U.S.C. section 1112 (e)(1)(B)(i).			(j)  The right to opt out of health or sex education and any other objectionable material, as set forth in RSA 186:11, IX-b and IX-c.			(k)  The right to access and review all education records relating to a minor child within 14 days after the day the school receives a request for access as set forth in RSA 189:66, IV, and 34 C.F.R. 99.5.  			(l)  The right to be promptly notified if a criminal offense has been committed against a minor child, as set forth in RSA 193-D:4. 			(m)  The right to be notified whenever seclusion or restraint has been used on the child as set forth in RSA 126-U:7.			(n)  The right to be informed of the school district’s policy regarding discipline policies and procedures, as set forth in RSA 193:13.			(o)  The right to be advised of any non-academic survey or questionnaire to be administered to a child and the requirement that the parent consent to a child completing such a survey or questionnaire, as well as the right to opt the child out of the Youth Risk Behavior Survey developed by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, as set forth in RSA 186:11, IX-d. 			(p)  The right to access and review all medical records of a child maintained by a school or school personnel, except: 				(1)  As restricted by RSA 132:32-132:36, RSA 141-C:18, RSA 141-F:7, RSA 135-C:19-A; or				(2)  If the parent has been convicted of any crime of violence against the minor child; or 				(3)  If the parent is the subject of an investigation of a crime committed against the minor child and a law enforcement agency has requested of the applicable court that the information not be released to the parent in order to protect the integrity of an ongoing investigation.			(q)  The right to consent in writing before a biometric scan of a child is made, shared, or stored, as set forth in RSA 189:65 and RSA 189:68.			(r)  The right to consent in writing before any record of a child’s blood or deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) is created, stored, or shared, except as required by general law or authorized pursuant to a court order.			(s)  The right to be informed of, and provide consent to, any medical procedure or treatment to be performed on a child, except pursuant to RSA 132:34, RSA 141-C:18, or for the provision of emergency medical treatment. 			(t)  The right to inquire of the school or school personnel and to be truthfully and completely informed if their child is being identified by any name other than the name under which the child was enrolled in the school or any nickname that a reasonable person would understand to be commonly derived from such name, including under circumstances which a reasonable person would understand to be for the purpose of facilitating a change of gender or gender transition.			(u)  The right to inquire of the school or school personnel and to be truthfully and completely informed if the child is being identified or referred to by school district staff, as being of a gender other than that of which the child was identified or referred when enrolled.			(v)  The right to inquire of the school or school personnel and to be truthfully and completely informed if any school or school personnel are proceeding with any intervention to affirm or to provide an accommodation of a child’s asserted gender identity when the student’s gender identity is other than that of which the child was identified or referred when enrolled.			(w)  The right to know what extracurricular activities, clubs, or organizations their child is participating in.		II.  Federal law provides for additional parent and family involvement for schools that are receiving Title I, Part A; Title I, Part C (migrant); Title III, Part A (EL) funds, including:			(a)  The right to receive information, including student reports, in an understandable and uniform format and to the extent practicable, in a language that parents can understand, as set forth in 20 U.S.C. sections 1112(e)(4); 1114(b)(4); 1116(e)(5); and 1116(f).			(b)  Upon request of the parent, the right to receive information regarding state qualifications of the student’s classroom teachers and paraprofessionals providing services to the child, as set forth in 20 U.S.C. section 1112(e)(1)(A)(i-ii). 			(c)  The right to receive an annual local educational agency report card that includes information on such agency as a whole and each school served by the agency, as set forth in 20 U.S.C. section 1111(h)(2)(A-B)(i-iii).		III.  Nothing in this chapter shall:			(a)  Authorize a parent of a minor child in this state to engage in conduct that is unlawful or to abuse or neglect his or her minor child in violation of general law.			(b)  Prohibit a court of competent jurisdiction, law enforcement officer, or employees of a government agency that is responsible for child welfare from acting in their official capacity, pursuant to RSA 186:11, IX-c.	189-B:4  Violations.  		I.  No school or school personnel, shall infringe upon any of the parental rights set forth in RSA 189-B:3, unless the infringement is supported by clear and convincing evidence and is narrowly tailored to address the compelling state interest.		II.  Any parent claiming violation of any provision of this chapter may bring an action for declaratory and/or injunctive relief and monetary damages against the school or school personnel.  If a parent prevails in any such court action,  the court shall award to the parent his or her reasonable attorneys’ fees and court costs, including any such attorneys’ fees and court costs incurred in an appeal to the supreme court.	189-B:5  Procedure Upon Determination of The Existence of a Compelling State Interest Warranting Infringement Upon Parental Rights.  Upon determining that a compelling state interest requires a school or school personnel to infringe upon any of the parental rights described in this chapter, such school personnel shall immediately notify his or her superior of his or her intent to infringe upon parental rights in a written report that identifies each of the articulable facts that the person believes justifies the infringement of parental rights.  Such report shall identify the individual parental rights that the school or school personnel proposes to infringe upon and the basis for such infringement.  The report shall also state the anticipated duration for the continued impingement of parental rights and all steps the school or school personnel proposes to take to address the compelling state interest.  The infringement of parental rights shall continue for no longer than is necessary to address the compelling state interest. 	189-B:6  School Board Notification of Parent’s Rights.  Every school board shall annually provide a written notice to all parents of minors in the district of their rights as set forth in RSA 189-B:3.	189-B:7  Severability.  If any provision of this chapter or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect other provisions or applications of this chapter which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this chapter are severable. 3  Effective Date.  This act shall take effect September 1, 2023. 											LBA											23-1062											2/15/23 SB 272-FN- FISCAL NOTEAS INTRODUCED AN ACT	establishing a parents' bill of rights in education. FISCAL IMPACT:	Due to time constraints, the Office of Legislative Budget Assistant is unable to provide a fiscal note for this bill, as introduced, at this time.  When completed, the fiscal note will be forwarded to the Senate Clerk's Office. AGENCIES CONTACTED:	Department of Education 


MISSISSIPPI LEGISLATURE
2023 Regular Session
To: Education
By: Senator(s) Hill
Senate Bill 2820
AN ACT ENTITLED THE "TRANSPARENCY IN EDUCATION ACT";
TO PROVIDE PARENTS OF PUBLIC SCHOOL STUDENTS CERTAIN RIGHTS RELATED TO THEIR CHILD'S
EDUCATION, INCLUDING THE RIGHT TO REVIEW A SYLLABUS, CURRICULUM AND TEACHER-TRAINING
MATERIALS AND MEET WITH THE TEACHER TO DISCUSS COURSE CONTENT; TO REQUIRE PUBLIC
SCHOOLS TO ADOPT PROCEDURES TO ENSURE THAT A PARENT PROVIDES WRITTEN PERMISSION
BEFORE THEIR CHILD PARTICIPATES IN IDENTITY CURRICULUM OR CRITICAL THEORY CURRICULUM
AND ALLOW PARENTS TO EXEMPT THEIR CHILD FROM ANY SPECIFIC LESSONS THAT ARE OBJECTIONABLE
TO THE FAMILY; TO DIRECT PUBLIC SCHOOLS TO HOLD A CURRICULUM NIGHT TO ALLOW PARENTS
TO REVIEW THE CURRICULUM AND MEET WITH TEACHERS AND STAFF; TO PROVIDE PARENTAL ACCESS
TO CERTAIN SCHOOL DISTRICT RECORDS CONCERNING THEIR CHILD; TO PROVIDE COMPLAINT
PROCEDURES; TO AMEND SECTION 37-13-9, MISSISSIPPI CODE OF 1972, IN CONFORMITY;
AND FOR RELATED PURPOSES.
     BE IT ENACTED BY THE
LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF MISSISSIPPI:
     SECTION
1.  Title.  This act may be
known and cited as the "Transparency in Education Act."
     SECTION
2.  Definitions.  As used in
this act:
          (a)  "Curriculum" includes all textbooks, reading materials, handouts, videos, presentations, digital materials, websites, online applications, digital applications for a phone, laptop or tablet, questionnaires, surveys, or other written or electronic materials that have been or will be assigned, distributed, or otherwise presented physically or virtually to students in a class or course.
          (b)
 "Identity curriculum" means curriculum that has the goal or purpose
of studying, exploring, or informing students about gender roles or
stereotypes, gender identity, gender expression, sexual orientation, or
romantic or sexual relationships.
          (c)
 "Critical theory curriculum" means curriculum that discusses any of
the following concepts:
               (i)
 The United States or the State of Mississippi is fundamentally, inherently, or
irredeemably racist, sexist, oppressive or discriminatory;
               (ii)
 An individual, by virtue of sex, race, ethnicity, religion, color or national
origin, is inherently racist, sexist, oppressive or discriminatory whether
consciously or unconsciously;
               (iii)
 An individual, by virtue of sex, race, ethnicity, religion, color or national
origin, should be blamed or held responsible for actions committed in the past
by other members of the individual's sex, race, ethnicity, religion, color or
national origin;
               (iv)
 An individual's moral character is necessarily determined, in whole or in
part, by the individual's sex, race, ethnicity, religion, color or national
origin;
               (v)
 An individual should feel guilt, blame, discomfort, anguish, or any other form
of psychological distress on account of the individual's sex, race, ethnicity,
religion, color or national origin; or
               (vi)  Any individual, by virtue of sex,
race, ethnicity, religion, color or national origin, is marginalized as
perpetually victimized or unable to advance in society due to being victimized,
marginalized, or oppressed by others.
          (d)
 "Public school" or "school" means a school subject to the provisions
of Title 37, Mississippi Code of 1972.  Public school does not include any
school not subject to Title 37, including a private school, religious school or
home-educating family.
          (e)
 "Parent" means the natural or adoptive parent or legal guardian of a
minor child.
          (f)
 "Syllabus" means a written description of all topics and subjects
taught in a class or course, and shall include a list of all curriculum used in
the class or course, the identity of all individuals providing in-person or
live remote instruction in the class or course, and a description of any
assemblies, guest lectures, field trips, or other educational activities that
are part of the class or course.
     SECTION
3.  Parents' rights and school
procedures.  (1)  Each public school shall have a procedure for a parent
to:
          (a)
 Review the syllabus and all curriculum for each class or course offered by the
school, and any teacher-training materials, during regular hours of operation
of the school or by special appointment;
          (b)
 Copy and record information from the syllabus, curriculum and any teacher-training
materials; and
          (c)
 Meet with the teacher of the class or course, the principal, or other representative
from the school to discuss the syllabus, curriculum and any teacher-training materials.
     (2)
 Each public school shall have a procedure to ensure that a child does not attend
any instruction or presentation that includes Identity Curriculum or Critical
Theory Curriculum unless the school has received written permission from the
child's parent authorizing the child to attend the instruction or presentation.
     (3)
 Each public school shall have a procedure for a parent to withdraw their child
from any specific instruction or presentation that the parent, in the parent's sole
discretion, objects to their child receiving.  The procedure shall set forth reasonable
arrangements that school personnel will take to provide alternative instruction
or educational activities to the child.  Alternative instruction may be
provided by the parent if the alternative instruction offered by the school
does not meet the concerns of the parent.  The school is not required to pay
for the costs of alternative instruction provided by a parent.  School
personnel may not impose an academic or other penalty upon a child who is
withdrawn from an objectionable instruction or presentation under this section.
 This section does not exempt a child from satisfying grade-level or graduation
requirements.
     (4)
 Each public school shall publish the procedures required by this section on the
school's website.
      SECTION
4.  Curriculum transparency.
 (1)  At least seven (7) days prior to the start of each academic school period
or semester, a public school shall:
          (a)
 Compile a physical and/or electronic copy of the syllabus and all curriculum
for each class or course offered by the school;
          (b)
 Post on the school's website a syllabus for each class or course offered by
the school;
          (c)
 Schedule and provide written notice to all parents of a "curriculum night"
which shall be held no later than fourteen (14) days after the start of each academic
school period or semester.  During the curriculum night, the school shall allow
parents to:
               (i)
 Review in-person the syllabus and all curriculum for each class or course
offered by the school; and
               (ii)
 Speak about the subjects and curriculum taught in a class or course with the
teacher, or if the teacher is unavailable, another representative from the
school familiar with the subjects and curriculum of the course or class.
          (d)
 Send a written notice to the parents of each child enrolled in the school, and
post on a conspicuous location on the school's website, the following
information:
               (i)
 Parents have the right to review the syllabus and all curriculum for each
class or course at the school office during regular hours of operation or after
regular hours by special appointment;
               (ii)
 Parents have the right to copy or record information from the syllabus and
curriculum;
               (iii)
 Parents have the right to meet with the teacher of the class or course, the
principal, or other representative from the school to discuss the syllabus and
curriculum;
               (iv)
 An explanation of the rights of parents and obligations of public schools set
forth in this act, including an active website address where parents can read a
copy of this act;
               (v)
 A permission form that a parent must sign and return to the school prior to
their child attending any instruction or presentation containing Identity
Curriculum or Critical Theory Curriculum; and
               (vi)
 A form that a parent may sign and return to the school to withdraw their child
from any specific instruction or presentation that the parent, in the parent's
sole discretion, objects to their child receiving.
     (2)
 If any curriculum is added to a class or course after the start of each academic
school period or semester, the school shall provide the following to parents of
each child enrolled in the class or course at least three (3) days prior to the
added curriculum being taught:
          (a)
 A written or electronic copy of the revised syllabus which shall conspicuously
identify the added curriculum;
          (b)
 A written or electronic statement informing parents of their right to review the
added curriculum for each class or course offered by the school and copy and
record information from the revised syllabus and added curriculum to discuss
with the teacher, the principal, or other representative from the school;
          (c)
 A written or electronic statement informing parents that they may withdraw
their child from any specific instruction or presentation that the parent, in
the parent's sole discretion, objects to their child receiving and provide a
link to the location on the school's website where a parent can obtain the
form.
     SECTION
5.  Right to access a child's educational
records.  (1)  A parent shall have access to all written and electronic
records concerning the parent's child that are controlled by or in the
possession of a school district, district employee or any person or
organization hired, contracted or authorized by the school district to provide
services to students, including:
          (a)
 Attendance records;
          (b)
 Test scores of school-administered tests and state-wide assessments;
          (c)
 Grades;
          (d)
 Extracurricular activity or club participation;
          (e)
 Their child's email accounts;
          (f)
 Their child's online or virtual accounts or data;
          (g)
 Disciplinary records;
          (h)
 Counseling records;
          (i)
 Psychological records;
          (j)
 Applications for admission;
          (k)
 Health and immunization information, including any medical records maintained
by a health clinic or medical facility operated or controlled by the school
district or located on district property;
          (l)
 Teacher and counselor evaluations; and
          (m)
 Reports of behavioral patterns.
     (2)
 School employees shall not withhold or conceal information from, or facilitate,
encourage or coerce a child to withhold or conceal information from, the child's
parents about the child's:
          (a)
 Curricular or extracurricular projects, assignments or activities;
          (b)
 Physical, emotional, or mental health; or
          (c)
 Purported gender identity or requested transition, where the child's purported
gender identity is incongruous with his or her biological sex.
     SECTION
6.  Remedies for violations.
 (1)  A parent may submit a written complaint detailing any violation of this act
to the superintendent of the school district.  The parent shall be entitled to
a meeting with the superintendent to discuss the complaint if desired by the parent.
 The superintendent shall investigate the complaint and respond to the parent
in writing within fourteen (14) days after receiving the complaint describing
the actions the superintendent shall take to remedy the complaint.
     (2)
 A parent may appeal the actions of the superintendent to the school district local
school board by submitting a written complaint detailing the violation of the act
and a description why the superintendent's response failed to remedy the complaint.
 The local school board shall appoint a committee to investigate any such
complaints.  The committee shall meet with the parent to discuss the complaint.
 Within thirty (30) days of receiving the complaint, the committee shall submit
a recommended response and proposed steps to remedy the complaint to the full
board for action by the board at the next regularly scheduled meeting.
     (3)
 If the board's action does not remedy a complaint, a parent may file suit and assert
a violation of this act as a claim against the school district.
     (4)
 Nothing in this section precludes a parent from filing a suit asserting a violation
of this act or any other claim otherwise allowed by law.
     (5)
 A parent that successfully asserts a claim under this act may recover:
          (a)
 Declaratory relief;
          (b)
 Injunctive relief to prevent or remedy a violation of this act or the effects
of such a violation;
          (c)
 Reasonable attorneys' fees and costs; and
          (d)
 Any other appropriate relief.
     SECTION
7.  Student privacy.  Any
student whose bodily privacy is violated, including encountering a person of
the opposite sex in a bathroom, locker room or other facility traditionally
designated for the exclusive use of members of one sex, by any action, policy
or practice of a primary or secondary school or institution of higher education
shall have a private cause of action for injunctive relief, damages and any
other relief available under law against the school or institution.
     SECTION
8.  Rules of construction and severability.
 (1)  This act shall be construed in favor of a broad protection of parental authority
over the care, upbringing, and education of their child.
     (2)
 If any provision of this act or any application of such provision to any particular
person or circumstance is held to be invalid under law, the remainder of this act
and the application of its provisions to any other person or circumstance shall
not be affected.
     SECTION 9.  Section
37-13-9, Mississippi Code of 1972, is amended as follows:
     37-13-9.  The State Board of
Education is hereby authorized to appoint a curriculum committee, composed of
professional and lay members, not to exceed seven (7) in number, to make
a continuous study of the curriculum of the public schools and to make recommendations
to the State Board of Education from time to time as to changes which should be
made in the curriculum in the grammar school grades and in the high school
grades.  On or before July 1, 2023, and annually thereafter, the curriculum committee
shall develop a report to the State Board of Education and Legislature relating
to the compliance of each public school district and school in the state with the
provisions of the "Transparency in Education Act" with recommendations
to the Commission on School Accreditation regarding the continued accreditation
of each school district and school based on compliance with said act.  The
members of such committee as of July 1, 1954, shall continue to serve until the
expiration of the terms for which they were appointed; thereafter, the
members of such committee shall be appointed and serve for a term of two (2)
years and until their successors are appointed.  Each member of said committee
shall receive a per diem of Fifteen Dollars ($15.00) for each day actually
spent attending the meetings of the committee and, in addition, each member
shall be reimbursed for actual travel expenses at the rate of Six Cents ($.06)
per mile for each mile traveled in attending the meetings of the committee. 
However, the total amount paid to any member of the committee for per diem
shall not exceed the sum of One Hundred Fifty Dollars ($150.00) in any one (1)
year.  The per diem and travel expenses provided for herein shall be paid out
of such appropriation as may be made for such purpose by the Legislature.
     SECTION 10.  This act
shall take effect and be in force from and after July 1, 2023.







MISSISSIPPI LEGISLATURE
2023 Regular Session
To: Judiciary B
By: Representative Gunn
House Bill 1489
AN ACT TO ESTABLISH THE "FAMILIES' RIGHTS AND
RESPONSIBILITIES ACT OF 2023"; TO DEFINE TERMINOLOGY USED HEREIN; TO
ESTABLISH THAT A PARENT'S LIBERTY TO DIRECT THE UPBRINGING, EDUCATION, HEALTH
CARE AND MENTAL HEALTH OF HIS OR HER CHILD IS A FUNDAMENTAL RIGHT; TO PROHIBIT
THE STATE OR ANY POLITICAL SUBDIVISION THEREOF FROM SUBSTANTIALLY BURDENING A
PARENT'S FUNDAMENTAL RIGHT WITHOUT DEMONSTRATING THAT THE BURDEN IS REQUIRED BY
A COMPELLING GOVERNMENTAL INTEREST; TO PROVIDE THAT ALL PARENTAL RIGHTS ARE
EXCLUSIVELY RESERVED TO A PARENT OF A CHILD WITHOUT OBSTRUCTION BY OR
INTERFERENCE FROM THE STATE OR ANY POLITICAL SUBDIVISION THEREOF; TO PROVIDE
THAT ABUSE OR NEGLECT OF A CHILD BY A PARENT OR THE ACTION OR DECISION OF A PARENT
THAT WOULD END LIFE ARE NOT AUTHORIZED BY THIS ACT; TO PROHIBIT EMPLOYEES OF
THIS STATE AND ANY POLITICAL SUBDIVISION THEREOF, EXCEPT FOR LAW ENFORCEMENT
PERSONNEL, FROM ENCOURAGING OR COERCING A CHILD TO WITHHOLD INFORMATION FROM
THE CHILD'S PARENT; TO FURTHER PROHIBIT SUCH EMPLOYEES FROM WITHHOLDING
INFORMATION THAT IS RELEVANT TO A CHILD'S PHYSICAL, EMOTIONAL OR MENTAL HEALTH
FROM A CHILD'S PARENT; TO REQUIRE THE BOARD OF EDUCATION OF A SCHOOL DISTRICT
TO DEVELOP AND ADOPT A POLICY TO PROMOTE THE INVOLVEMENT OF PARENTS OF CHILDREN
ENROLLED IN THE DISTRICT'S SCHOOLS; TO PRESCRIBE THE MINIMUM REQUIREMENT
PROCEDURES TO BE ADDRESSED BY THE POLICY; TO PROVIDE THE BOARD OF EDUCATION OF
A SCHOOL DISTRICT WITH THE DISCRETION TO ADOPT A POLICY TO PROVIDE TO PARENTS
THE INFORMATION IN AN ELECTRONIC FORM; TO REQUIRE PARENTS TO SUBMIT A WRITTEN
OR ELECTRONIC REQUEST FOR THE CHILD'S INFORMATION TO THE SCHOOL PRINCIPAL OR
THE SUPERINTENDENT OF THE SCHOOL DISTRICT; TO REQUIRE THE SCHOOL PRINCIPAL OR
SUPERINTENDENT TO PROVIDE THE REQUESTED INFORMATION TO THE PARENTS WITHIN TEN
DAYS OF RECEIVING THE REQUEST, OR SUBMIT TO THE PARENT A WRITTEN EXPLANATION OF
THE REASONS FOR THE DENIAL OF THE REQUESTED INFORMATION; TO PRESCRIBE THE
PROCESS BY WHICH A PARENT MAY SUBMIT A FORMAL CONSIDERATION OF THE REQUEST OF INFORMATION
WITH THE SCHOOL BOARD IF THE REQUESTED INFORMATION IS NOT RECEIVED 15 DAYS
AFTER SUBMITTING THE INITIAL REQUEST; TO STIPULATE THE LIMITATIONS PLACED UPON
PERSONS, CORPORATIONS, ASSOCIATIONS, ORGANIZATIONS, STATE SUPPORTED
INSTITUTIONS OR INDIVIDUALS EMPLOYED BY ANY OF THESE ENTITIES TO PROVIDE ANY
MEDICAL OR MENTAL HEALTH SERVICE OR PROCEDURE ON A CHILD WITHOUT FIRST
OBTAINING THE CONSENT OF THE CHILD'S PARENT, EXCEPT AS OTHERWISE PROVIDED BY
LAW OR COURT ORDER; TO PRESCRIBE EXCEPTIONS TO THE LIMITATION WHEN PARENTAL
CONSENT IS NOT CAPABLE OF BEING GIVEN OR IN EMERGENCY SITUATIONS WHEN IMMINENT
BODILY HARM OR DEATH COULD RESULT; TO SPECIFY THE MANNER BY WHICH PARENTAL
CONSENT MUST BE VERIFIED IF TELEMEDICINE IS PROVIDED; TO ESTABLISH A CAUSE OF ACTION
FOR VIOLATION OF THIS ACT; TO PROVIDE THAT THIS ACT SHALL SERVE AS A DEFENSE TO
ANY CAUSE OF ACTION THAT IS RAISED AS A RESULT OF A VIOLATION THEREOF; TO PROVIDE
THAT THE RULES OF CONSTRUCTION SHALL PROVIDE BROAD PROTECTION OF A PARENT'S FUNDAMENTAL
RIGHTS AS INALIENABLE UNLESS THOSE RIGHTS HAVE BEEN LEGALLY WAIVED OR LEGALLY TERMINATED;
TO PROVIDE FOR SEVERABILITY IF ANY PART OF THIS ACT IS HELD INVALID; TO AMEND
SECTION 37-3-49, MISSISSIPPI CODE OF 1972, TO PROVIDE THE PARENT OF EACH PUBLIC
SCHOOL STUDENT WITH THE RIGHT TO RECEIVE EFFECTIVE COMMUNICATION FROM THE SCHOOL
PRINCIPAL AS TO THE MANNER IN WHICH INSTRUCTIONAL MATERIALS ARE USED TO
IMPLEMENT THE SCHOOL'S CURRICULAR OBJECTIVES; TO AMEND SECTION 37-13-173,
MISSISSIPPI CODE OF 1972, TO PROVIDE PARENTS THE AUTHORITY TO OPT THEIR
CHILDREN OUT OF ANY INSTRUCTION OF THE SCHOOL DISTRICT'S COMPREHENSIVE HEALTH
EDUCATION RELATING TO SEX EDUCATION UPON SUBMITTING A WRITTEN REQUEST TO THE
SCHOOL PRINCIPAL; TO AMEND SECTION 37-15-3, MISSISSIPPI CODE OF 1972, TO
PROVIDE THAT STUDENT AND PARENTAL RIGHTS TO EDUCATION RECORDS CREATED, MAINTAINED,
OR USED BY PUBLIC EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS AND AGENCIES SHALL BE PROTECTED; TO STIPULATE
THAT STUDENTS AND THEIR PARENTS MAINTAIN THE RIGHT TO ACCESS THE STUDENT'S EDUCATIONAL
RECORDS, WAIVE ACCESS TO SUCH RECORDS, CHALLENGE THE CONTENT OF SUCH RECORDS, PRIVACY
OF SUCH RECORDS AND TO RECEIVE ANNUAL NOTICE OF THE RIGHTS TO SUCH RECORDS; TO
BRING FORWARD SECTION 43-21-105, MISSISSIPPI CODE OF 1972, FOR THE PURPOSE OF POSSIBLE
AMENDMENT; AND FOR RELATED PURPOSES.
     BE IT ENACTED BY THE
LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF MISSISSIPPI:
     SECTION 1.  This
act shall be known and may be cited as the "Families' Rights and Responsibilities
Act of 2023."
     SECTION 2.  As
used in this act, the following terms shall have the meaning ascribed in this section
unless context of usage requires otherwise:
          (a)  "Child"
means an individual under the age of eighteen (18).  The term does not include any
child who has been adjudicated as a legally emancipated minor in accordance with
state law by a court of competent jurisdiction.
          (b)  "Curriculum"
includes all textbooks, reading materials, handouts, videos, presentations,
digital materials, websites, online applications, digital applications for a phone,
laptop or tablet, questionnaires, surveys, or other written or electronic
materials that have been or will be assigned, distributed or otherwise
presented physically or virtually to students in a class or course.
          (c)  "Educational
records" includes attendance records, test scores of school-administered
tests and state-wide assessments, grades, extracurricular activity or club
participation, e-mail accounts, online or virtual accounts or data,
disciplinary records, counseling records, psychological records, applications
for admission, health and immunization information including any medical
records maintained by a health clinic or medical facility operated or
controlled by the school district or located on district property, teacher and
counselor evaluations, and reports of behavioral patterns.
          (d)  "Parent"
means a biological parent of a child, an adoptive parent of a child, or an
individual who has been granted exclusive right, guardianship and authority
over the welfare of a child under state law.
          (e)  "Substantial
burden" means any action that directly or indirectly constrains, inhibits,
curtails, or denies the right of a parent to direct the upbringing, education,
health care and mental health of that parent's child, or compels any action contrary
to the right of a parent to direct the upbringing, education, health care and
mental health of that parent's child. The term includes, but is not limited to,
withholding benefits, assessing criminal, civil or administrative penalties or
damages, or exclusion from governmental assistance programs.
     SECTION 3.  Parental
Rights are Fundamental.
     (1)  The liberty of a parent to direct the upbringing, education,
health care and mental health of that parent's child is a fundamental right.
     (2)  Except as otherwise provided
by statute, this state, any political subdivision of this state or any other
governmental entity shall not substantially burden the fundamental right of a
parent to direct the upbringing, education, health care and mental health of
that parent's child without demonstrating that the burden is required by a
compelling governmental interest of the highest order as applied to the parent
and the child and is the least restrictive means of furthering that compelling
governmental interest.
     SECTION 4.  Rights
and Responsibilities.
     (1)  All parental rights are
exclusively reserved to a parent of a child without obstruction by or
interference from this state, any political subdivision of this state, any
other governmental entity or any other institution, including without limitation,
the following rights and responsibilities:
          (a)  To direct the
education of the child, including the right to choose public, private,
religious or home schools, and the right to make reasonable choices within
public schools for the education of the child;
          (b)  To access and
review all written and electronic educational records relating to the child
that are controlled by or in the possession of a school;
          (c)  To direct the
upbringing of the child;
          (d)  To direct the moral
or religious training of the child;
          (e)  To make and
consent in writing to all physical and mental health care decisions for the
child;
          (f)  To access and
review all health and medical records of the child;
          (g)  To consent in
writing before a biometric scan of the child is made, shared or stored;
          (h)  To consent in writing
before any record of the child's blood or deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) is created,
stored or shared, unless authorized pursuant to a court order;
          (i)  To consent in
writing before any governmental entity makes a video or voice recording of the
child, unless the video or voice recording is made during or as a part of:
               (i)  A court
proceeding;
               (ii)  A law
enforcement investigation;
               (iii)  A forensic
interview in a criminal or Department of Child Protection Services
investigation;
               (iv)  The security
or surveillance of buildings or grounds; or
               (v)  A photo
identification card;
          (j)  To be notified
promptly if an employee of this state, any political subdivision of this state,
any other governmental entity or any other institution suspects that abuse, neglect
or any criminal offense has been committed against the child;
          (k)  To opt the child
out of any personal analysis, evaluation, survey or data collection by a school
district that would capture data for inclusion in the state longitudinal student
data system except what is necessary and essential to establish a student's
educational record;
          (l)  The right to have
the child excused from school attendance for religious purposes; and
          (m)  The right to
participate in parent-teacher associations and school organizations that are
sanctioned by the board of education of a school district.
     (2)  This section does not
authorize or allow a parent to abuse or neglect a child as defined in Section 43-21-105.
 This section does not apply to a parental action or decision that would end
life.  This section does not prohibit a court from issuing an order that is
otherwise permitted by law.
     (3)  No employee of this
state, any political subdivision of this state, or any other governmental
entity, except for law enforcement personnel, shall encourage or coerce a child
to withhold information from the child's parent.  Nor shall any such employee
withhold from a child's parent information that is relevant to the physical,
emotional or mental health of the child.
     SECTION 5.  Educational
Involvement.
     (1)  The board of education
of a school district, in consultation with parents, teachers and
administrators, shall develop and adopt a policy to promote the involvement of parents
of children enrolled in the schools within the school district, including:
          (a)  A plan for parent
participation in the schools which is designed to improve parent and teacher
cooperation in such areas as homework, attendance and discipline;
          (b)  Procedures by
which a parent may learn about the course of study for that parent's child and
review all curriculum. These procedures shall allow a parent to:
               (i)  Review a
syllabus for each class or course that the parent's child is enrolled in at least
seven (7) days before the start of each class or course.  The syllabus shall
include a written description of all topics and subjects taught in a class or
course, and shall include a list of all curriculum used in the class or course,
the identity of all individuals providing in-person or live remote instruction
in the class or course, and a description of any assemblies, guest lectures,
field trips or other educational activities that are part of the class or course;
               (ii)  Review all
curriculum for each class or course offered by the school and any teacher
training materials at least three (3) days before the curriculum or materials
being taught or used for instruction is presented to students;
               (iii)  Copy and
record information from the curriculum and teacher training materials; and
               (iv)  Meet with
the teacher of the class or course, the principal, or other representative from
the school to discuss the curriculum and teaching training materials.
          (c)  Procedures to
notify a parent at least three (3) days in advance and obtain the parent's written
consent before the parent's child attends any instruction or presentation that
has the goal or purpose of studying, exploring or informing students about
gender roles or stereotypes, gender identity, gender expression, sexual
orientation or romantic or sexual relationships;
          (d)  Procedures by
which a parent who objects to any specific instruction or presentation on the
basis that it is harmful may withdraw that parent's child from the instruction
or presentation.  Objection to a specific instruction or presentation on the
basis that it is harmful includes, but is not limited to, objection to a
material or activity because it questions beliefs or practices regarding sex,
morality or religion;
          (e)  Procedures by
which a parent may learn about the nature and purpose of clubs and
extracurricular activities that have been approved by the school and may
withdraw that parent's child from any club or extracurricular to which the
parent objects;
          (f)  Procedures by
which a parent must provide written consent before their child uses a name or
nickname other than their legal name, or before a child uses a pronoun that
does not align with the child's sex.  However, even if a parent provides
written consent, no person shall be compelled to use pronouns that do not align
with the child's sex; and
          (g)  Procedures by
which a parent may learn about parental rights and responsibilities under the
laws of this state.
     (2)  The board of education
of a school district may adopt a policy to provide to parents the information
required by this section in an electronic form.
     (3)  A parent shall submit a
written or electronic request for information pursuant to this section to
either the school principal or the superintendent of the school district.  Within
ten (10) days of receiving the request for information, the school principal or
the superintendent shall either deliver the requested information to the parent
or submit to the parent a written explanation of the reasons for the denial of
the requested information.  If the request for information is denied or the
parent does not receive the requested information within fifteen (15) days
after submitting the request for information, the parent may submit a written
request for the information to the board of education of the school district,
which shall formally consider the request at the next scheduled public meeting
of the board if the request can be properly noticed on the agenda.  If the
request cannot be properly noticed on the agenda, the board of education shall
formally consider the request at the next subsequent public meeting of the
board.
     SECTION 6.  Medical
and Mental Health Care.
     (1)  Except as otherwise
provided by law or court order, a person, corporation, association,
organization, state-supported institution or individual employed by any of
these entities must obtain the consent of a parent of a child before taking any
of the following actions:
          (a)  Procuring,
soliciting to perform, arranging for the performance of, providing a referral
for, or performing surgical procedures upon a child;
          (b)  Procuring,
soliciting to perform, arranging for the performance of, providing a referral
for, or performing a physical examination upon a child;
          (c)  Prescribing or dispensing
any medication or prescription drugs to a child; or
          (d)  Procuring,
soliciting to perform, arranging for the performance of, providing a referral
for, or performing a mental health evaluation in a clinical or nonclinical setting,
or mental health treatment on a child.
     (2)  If the parental consent
pursuant to subsection (1) is given through telemedicine, the person or entity
obtaining parental consent must verify the identity of the parent at the site
where the consent is given.
     (3)  The provisions of this
section shall not apply when it has been determined by a physician that:
          (a)  An emergency
exists; and
          (b)  Either of the
following conditions is true:
               (i)  It is
necessary to perform an activity listed in subsection (1) in order to prevent
death or imminent irreparable physical injury to the child; or
               (ii)  A parent of
the child cannot be located or contacted after a reasonably diligent effort.
     (4)  The provisions of this
section do not apply to an abortion, which shall be governed by Chapter 41, Title
41, Mississippi Code of 1972, nor shall this section apply to any services or treatments
provided to facilitate gender transition or the performance of gender transition
procedures as defined in Section 2, House Bill 1125, 2023 Regular Session.
     SECTION 7.  Cause
of Action.
     (1)  A parent may bring suit
for any violation of this act and may raise the act as a defense in any
judicial or administrative proceeding without regard to whether the proceeding
is brought by or in the name of the state government, any private person or any
other party.
     (2)  Notwithstanding any
other provision of law, an action under this act may be commenced, and relief
may be granted, without regard to whether the person commencing the action has
sought or exhausted available administrative remedies.
     (3)  Any person who
successfully asserts a claim or defense under this act may recover declaratory
relief, injunctive relief, compensatory damages, reasonable attorneys' fees and
costs, and any other appropriate relief.
     (4)  Sovereign, governmental
and qualified immunities to suit and from liability are waived and abolished to
the extent of liability created by this act.
     SECTION 8.  Rules
of Construction.
     (1)  Unless those rights
have been legally waived or legally terminated, parents have inalienable rights
that are more comprehensive than those listed in this section.  The protections
of the fundamental right of parents to direct the upbringing, education, health
care and mental health of their child afforded by this act are in addition to
the protections provided under federal law, state law, and the state and federal
constitutions.
     (2)  This act shall be
construed in favor of a broad protection of the fundamental right of parents to
direct the upbringing, education, health care and mental health of their child.
     (3)  Nothing in this act
shall be construed to authorize any government to burden the fundamental right
of parents to direct the upbringing, education, health care and mental health
of their child.
     (4)  If a child has no
affirmative right of access to a particular medical or mental health procedure
or service, then nothing in this act shall be construed to grant that child's
parent an affirmative right of access to that procedure or service on that child's
behalf.
     (5)  State statutory law
adopted after the date of the enactment of this act is subject to this act
unless such law explicitly excludes such application by reference to this act.
     SECTION 9.  Severability
Clause. 
     If any provision of this act
or its application to any person or circumstances is held invalid, the invalidity
does not affect other provisions or applications of this act which can be given
effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end, the provisions
of this act are severable.
     SECTION 10.  Section
37-3-49, Mississippi Code of 1972, is amended as follows:
     37-3-49.  (1)  The State
Department of Education shall provide an instructional program and establish
guidelines and procedures for managing such program in the public schools
within the school districts throughout the state as part of the State Program of
Educational Accountability and Assessment of Performance as prescribed in
Section 37-3-46.  Public school districts may (a) elect to adopt the
instructional program and management system provided by the State Department of
Education, or (b) elect to adopt an instructional program and management system
which meets or exceeds criteria established by the State Department of
Education for such.  This provision shall begin with the courses taught in
Grades K-8 which contain skills tested through the Mississippi Basic Skills
Assessment Program and shall proceed through all secondary school courses
mandated for graduation and all secondary school courses in the Mississippi end-of-course
testing program.  Other state core objectives must be included in the district's
instructional program as they are provided by the State Department of Education
along with instructional practices, resources, evaluation items and management
procedures.  Districts are encouraged to adapt this program and accompanying
procedures to all other instructional areas.  The department shall provide that
such program and guidelines, or a program and guidelines developed by a local
school district which incorporates the core objectives from the curriculum
structure are enforced through the performance-based accreditation system.  It
is the intent of the Legislature that every effort be made to protect the instructional
time in the classroom and reduce the amount of paperwork which must be
completed by teachers.  The State Department of Education shall take steps to
insure that school districts properly use staff development time to work on the
districts' instructional management plans.
     (2)  The State Department of
Education shall provide such instructional program and management guidelines
which shall require for every public school district that:
          (a)  All courses taught
in Grades K-8 which contain skills which are tested through the Mississippi Basic
Skills Assessment Program, all secondary school courses mandated for graduation,
and all courses in the end-of-course testing program shall include the State
Department of Education's written list of learning objectives.
          (b)  The local school
board must adopt the objectives that will form the core curriculum which will
be systematically delivered throughout the district.
          (c)  The set of
objectives provided by the State Department of Education must be accompanied by
suggested instructional practices and resources that would help teachers
organize instruction so as to promote student learning of the objectives. 
Objectives added by the school district must also be accompanied by suggested
instructional practices and resources that would help teachers organize
instruction.  The instructional practices and resources that are identified are
to be used as suggestions and not as requirements that teachers must follow. 
The goal of the program is to have students to achieve the desired objective
and not to limit teachers in the way they teach.
          (d)  Standards for
student performance must be established for each core objective in the local
program and those standards establish the district's definition of mastery for
each objective.
          (e)  There shall be an
annual review of student performance in the instructional program against
locally established standards.  When weaknesses exist in the local
instructional program, the district shall take action to improve student performance.
     (3)  The parent of each
public school student has the right to receive effective communication from the
school principal as to the manner in which instructional materials are used to
implement the school's curricular objectives, in accordance with the provisions
of Section 5 of this act.
     ( * * *34)  The State Board of Education and
the board of trustees of each school district shall adopt policies to limit and
reduce the number and length of written reports that classroom teachers are
required to prepare.
     ( * * *45)  This section shall not be construed
to limit teachers from using their own professional skills to help students
master instructional objectives, nor shall it be construed as a call for more
detailed or complex lesson plans or any increase in testing at the local school
district level.
     ( * * *56)  Districts meeting the highest
levels of accreditation standards, as defined by the State Board of Education,
shall be exempted from the provisions of subsection (2) of this section.  
     SECTION 11.  Section
37-13-173, Mississippi Code of 1972, is amended as follows:
     37-13-173.  (1)  Each
school providing instruction or any other presentation on human sexuality in the
classroom, assembly or other official setting shall be required to provide no less
than * * *one (1) week's
three (3) days' written notice thereof to the parents of children in such
programs of instruction.  The written notice must inform the parents of their right
to request the inclusion of their child for such instruction or presentation.  The
notice also must inform the parents of the right, and the appropriate process, to
review the curriculum and all materials to be used in the lesson or presentation.
     (2)  Upon the written
request of any parent or legal guardian to the school principal to exempt his
or her child from the teaching of reproductive health or any disease, including
HIV/AIDS, in accordance with the provisions of Section 37-13-171, the school
shall excuse the parent's child from such instruction or presentation, without detriment
to the student.
     SECTION 12.  Section
37-15-3, Mississippi Code of 1972, is amended as follows:
     37-15-3.  (1) * * *Such The cumulative folders as are
provided for in Section 37-15-1 shall be kept in the school wherein the pupils
are in attendance.  Both the permanent records and the cumulative folders shall
be available to school officials, including teachers within the school district
who have been determined by the school district to have legitimate educational
interests.  In no case, however, shall such records be available to the general
public.
     (2)  The rights of
students and their parents or legal guardians with respect to education records
created, maintained, or used by public educational institutions and agencies
shall be protected.  Transcripts of courses and grades may be furnished
when requested by the parent or guardian or eligible pupil as prescribed in the
Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act of 1974, as amended, 20 USCS Section
1232g, the implementing regulations issued pursuant thereto, and this section,
provided the following:
          (a)  Students
and their parents shall have the right to access their education records, including
the right to inspect and review those records;
          (b)  Students
and their parents shall have the right to waive their access to their education
records in certain circumstances;
          (c)  Students
and their parents shall have the right to challenge the content of education
records in order to ensure that the records are not inaccurate, misleading or
otherwise a violation of privacy or other rights;
          (d)  Students and
their parents shall have the right of privacy with respect to such records and
reports; and
          (e)  Students
and their parents shall receive annual notice of their rights with respect to
education records.
     (3)  * * *Such The records shall be kept for each
pupil throughout his entire public school enrollment period.  In the event a
pupil transfers to a public school, including a charter school, then the
cumulative folder shall be furnished to the head of the school to which the
pupil transfers; if a pupil transfers to a private school, then a copy of the
cumulative folder shall be furnished to the head of the school to which the
pupil transfers.  The permanent record shall be kept permanently by the school
district from which the pupil transferred.
     (4)  At no time may a
permanent record of a student be destroyed, but cumulative folders may be
destroyed by order of the school board of the school district in not less than
five (5) years after the permanent record of the pupil has become inactive and
has been transferred to the central depository of the district.  * * *Provided, However, * * *that where a school district makes complete
copies of inactive permanent records on photographic film, microfilm * * *, or any other acceptable form of medium for
storage which may be reproduced as needed, * * *such those permanent records may be
destroyed after the photographic film or microfilm copy has been stored in the
central depository of the district.
     SECTION 13.  Section
43-21-105, Mississippi Code of 1972, is brought forward as follows:
     43-21-105.  The following
words and phrases, for purposes of this chapter, shall have the meanings
ascribed herein unless the context clearly otherwise requires:
          (a)  "Youth court"
means the Youth Court Division.
          (b)  "Judge"
means the judge of the Youth Court Division.
          (c)  "Designee"
means any person that the judge appoints to perform a duty which this chapter
requires to be done by the judge or his designee.  The judge may not appoint a
person who is involved in law enforcement or who
is an employee of the Mississippi Department of Human Services or the
Mississippi Department of Child Protection Services to be his designee.
          (d)  "Child"
and "youth" are synonymous, and each means a person who has not
reached his eighteenth birthday.  A child who has not reached his eighteenth
birthday and is on active duty for a branch of the armed services or is married
is not considered a "child" or "youth" for the purposes of
this chapter.
          (e)  "Parent"
means the father or mother to whom the child has been born, or the father or
mother by whom the child has been legally adopted.
          (f)  "Guardian"
means a court-appointed guardian of the person of a child.
          (g)  "Custodian"
means any person having the present care or custody of a child whether such
person be a parent or otherwise.
          (h)  "Legal
custodian" means a court-appointed custodian of the child.
          (i)  "Delinquent
child" means a child who has reached his tenth birthday and who has committed
a delinquent act.
          (j)  "Delinquent act"
is any act, which if committed by an adult, is designated as a crime under
state or federal law, or municipal or county ordinance other than offenses punishable
by life imprisonment or death.  A delinquent act includes escape from lawful
detention and violations of the Uniform Controlled Substances Law and violent
behavior.
          (k)  "Child in
need of supervision" means a child who has reached his seventh birthday
and is in need of treatment or rehabilitation because the child:
              (i)  Is habitually
disobedient of reasonable and lawful commands of his parent, guardian or custodian
and is ungovernable; or
              (ii)  While being
required to attend school, willfully and habitually violates the rules thereof
or willfully and habitually absents himself therefrom; or
              (iii)  Runs away from
home without good cause; or
              (iv)  Has committed
a delinquent act or acts.
          (l)  "Neglected
child" means a child:
              (i)  Whose parent,
guardian or custodian or any person responsible for his care or support,
neglects or refuses, when able so to do, to provide for him proper and
necessary care or support, or education as required by law, or medical,
surgical, or other care necessary for his well-being; however, a parent who
withholds medical treatment from any child who in good faith is under treatment
by spiritual means alone through prayer in accordance with the tenets and
practices of a recognized church or religious denomination by a duly accredited
practitioner thereof shall not, for that reason alone, be considered to be neglectful
under any provision of this chapter; or
              (ii)  Who is otherwise
without proper care, custody, supervision or support; or
              (iii)  Who, for any
reason, lacks the special care made necessary for him by reason of his mental
condition, whether the mental condition is having mental illness or having an
intellectual disability; or
              (iv)  Who, for any
reason, lacks the care necessary for his health, morals or well-being.
          (m)  "Abused child"
means a child whose parent, guardian or custodian or any person responsible for
his care or support, whether legally obligated to do so or not, has caused or
allowed to be caused, upon the child, sexual abuse, sexual exploitation,
commercial sexual exploitation, emotional abuse, mental injury, nonaccidental
physical injury or other maltreatment.  However, physical discipline, including
spanking, performed on a child by a parent, guardian or custodian in a reasonable
manner shall not be deemed abuse under this section.  "Abused child" also means a child who is or has been trafficked
within the meaning of the Mississippi Human Trafficking Act by any person,
without regard to the relationship of the person to the child.
          (n)  "Sexual abuse"
means obscene or pornographic photographing, filming or depiction of children
for commercial purposes, or the rape, molestation, incest, prostitution or
other such forms of sexual exploitation of children under circumstances which
indicate that the child's health or welfare is harmed or threatened.
          (o)  "A child in
need of special care" means a child with any mental or physical illness
that cannot be treated with the dispositional alternatives ordinarily available
to the youth court.
          (p)  A "dependent
child" means any child who is not a child in need of supervision, a
delinquent child, an abused child or a neglected child, and which child has been
voluntarily placed in the custody of the Department of Child Protection
Services by his parent, guardian or custodian.
          (q)  "Custody"
means the physical possession of the child by any person.
          (r)  "Legal custody"
means the legal status created by a court order which gives the legal custodian
the responsibilities of physical possession of the child and the duty to
provide him with food, shelter, education and reasonable medical care, all
subject to residual rights and responsibilities of the parent or guardian of
the person.
          (s)  "Detention"
means the care of children in physically restrictive facilities.
          (t)  "Shelter"
means care of children in physically nonrestrictive facilities.
          (u)  "Records involving
children" means any of the following from which the child can be
identified:
              (i)  All youth
court records as defined in Section 43-21-251;
              (ii)  All forensic
interviews conducted by a child advocacy center in abuse and neglect investigations;
              (iii)  All law
enforcement records as defined in Section 43-21-255;
              (iv)  All agency
records as defined in Section 43-21-257; and
              (v)  All other
documents maintained by any representative of the state, county, municipality or
other public agency insofar as they relate to the apprehension, custody, adjudication
or disposition of a child who is the subject of a youth court cause.
          (v)  "Any person
responsible for care or support" means the person who is providing for the
child at a given time.  This term shall include, but is not limited to, stepparents,
foster parents, relatives, nonlicensed babysitters or other similar persons
responsible for a child and staff of residential care facilities and group
homes that are licensed by the Department of Human Services or the Department
of Child Protection Services.
          (w)  The singular
includes the plural, the plural the singular and the masculine the feminine
when consistent with the intent of this chapter.
          (x)  "Out-of-home"
setting means the temporary supervision or care of children by the staff of licensed
day care centers, the staff of public, private and state schools, the staff of
juvenile detention facilities, the staff of unlicensed residential care
facilities and group homes and the staff of, or individuals representing,
churches, civic or social organizations.
          (y)  "Durable
legal custody" means the legal status created by a court order which gives
the durable legal custodian the responsibilities of physical possession of the
child and the duty to provide him with care, nurture, welfare, food, shelter,
education and reasonable medical care.  All these duties as enumerated are
subject to the residual rights and responsibilities of the natural parent(s) or
guardian(s) of the child or children.
          (z)  "Status
offense" means conduct subject to adjudication by the youth court that
would not be a crime if committed by an adult.
          (aa)  "Financially
able" means a parent or child who is ineligible for a court-appointed
attorney.
          (bb)  "Assessment"
means an individualized examination of a child to determine the child's
psychosocial needs and problems, including the type and extent of any mental
health, substance abuse or co-occurring mental health and substance abuse
disorders and recommendations for treatment.  The term includes, but is not
limited to, a drug and alcohol, psychological or psychiatric evaluation,
records review, clinical interview or the administration of a formal test and
instrument.
          (cc)  "Screening"
means a process, with or without the administration of a formal instrument,
that is designed to identify a child who is at increased risk of having mental
health, substance abuse or co-occurring mental health and substance abuse
disorders that warrant immediate attention, intervention or more comprehensive
assessment.
          (dd)  "Durable legal
relative guardianship" means the legal status created by a youth court
order that conveys the physical and legal custody of a child or children by
durable legal guardianship to a relative or fictive kin who is licensed as a
foster or resource parent.
          (ee)  "Relative"
means a person related to the child by affinity or consanguinity within the
third degree.
          (ff)  "Fictive kin"
means a person not related to the child legally or biologically but who is considered
a relative due to a significant, familial-like and ongoing relationship with
the child and family.
          (gg)  "Reasonable
efforts" means the exercise of reasonable care and due diligence by the
Department of Human Services, the Department of Child Protection Services, or
any other appropriate entity or person to use appropriate and available
services to prevent the unnecessary removal of the child from the home or
provide other services related to meeting the needs of the child and the
parents.
          (hh)  "Commercial
sexual exploitation" means any sexual act or crime of a sexual nature,
which is committed against a child for financial or economic gain, to obtain a
thing of value for quid pro quo exchange of property or for any other purpose.
     SECTION 14.  This act
shall take effect and be in force from and after July 1, 2023.










2023-2024 Bill 424 Text of Previous Version (Jan. 19, 2023) - South Carolina Legislature Online
 

South Carolina General Assembly125th Session, 2023-2024Bill 424Indicates Matter StrickenIndicates New Matter(Text matches printed bills. Document has been reformatted to meet World Wide Web specifications.)








A bill

TO AMEND THE SOUTH CAROLINA CODE OF LAWS BY ADDING SECTION 59-29-12 SO AS TO PROVIDE STUDENTS IN STATE-FUNDED PLACES OF LEARNING WITH AN EDUCATION FOCUSED ON EXCELLENCE AND INTEGRITY, EQUIP THEM TO THINK INDEPENDENTLY AND CRITICALLY, SUPPORT EDUCATORS BY MAINTAINING A LEARNING AND WORK ENVIRONMENT UNENCUMBERED BY SOCIAL OR POLITICAL ACTIVISM, TREAT STUDENTS AND EMPLOYEES OF SCHOOLS WITH DIGNITY AS UNIQUE INDIVIDUALS WITHOUT STEREOTYPING OR SCAPEGOATING, PROVIDE INSTRUCTION FREE FROM IDEOLOGICAL INDOCTRINATION OR COERCION, FOSTER AND DEFEND INTELLECTUAL INQUIRY AND FREEDOM OF SPEECH AS WELL AS FREEDOM FROM COMPELLED SPEECH, REQUIRE CLEAR DISTINCTIONS BETWEEN THE TEACHING OF THEORY AND FACT, REQUIRE FULL TRANSPARENCY OF CURRICULA, PROTECT THE PRIVACY AND INNOCENCE OF CHILDREN AND GUARD THEM AGAINST OBSCENE AND MATURE MATERIALS, RESPECT THE RIGHTS OF PARENTS AS THEIR child's DECISION-MAKERS FOR HEALTH AND WELL-BEING INCLUDING EMOTIONAL AND SEXUAL DEVELOPMENT, DEFER TO PARENTS AS THEIR child's PRIMARY SOURCE OF MORAL AND SOCIAL VALUES, ALLOW PARENTS TO OPT OUT OF ACTIVITIES THAT VIOLATE THIS ACT, ESTABLISH A CLEAR PROTOCOL FOR REPORTING VIOLATIONS AND ALLOWING LOCAL ENTITIES TO ADDRESS AND CORRECT ISSUES, AND REQUIRE PRIVACY AND NONDISCLOSURE DURING THE INVESTIGATION PROCESS.

Be it enacted by the General Assembly of the State of South Carolina:

SECTION 1.   Chapter 29, Title 59 of the S.C. Code is amended by adding:

   Section 59-29-12.   (A) It is the intent of the General Assembly that all State-funded education entities, including places of learning, state and local agencies, accreditation entities, overseeing authorities, instructional content providers, and educators, faculty, administrators, and staff:
      (1) strive to provide every student with a well-rounded, rigorous, and high-quality education with a positive focus on excellence and high expectations;
      (2) support and allow educators to focus on effectively teaching subjects and content by maintaining a learning and work environment unencumbered by social or political activism;
      (3) treat students, parents, and colleagues respectfully and equally as unique individuals, refraining from stereotyping or scapegoating others based on personal or group characteristics or political and religious beliefs; 
      (4) encourage and equip students, without employing ideological coercion or indoctrination, to think critically, creatively, and independently;
      (5) foster and defend freedom of intellectual inquiry, freedom of speech, freedom from compelled speech, and freedom of association;
      (6) respect students' freedom to express differing viewpoints without penalty or marginalization, especially on controversial topics;
      (7) provide instruction that is intellectually honest, placed in historical context, and grounded in verifiable facts;
      (8) provide full transparency to parents, legal custodians, and the public about the teaching subjects and instructional materials used to educate students;
      (9) respect the innocence of children by guarding them against obscene and age-inappropriate topics or content, and by protecting their right to privacy; and
      (10) respect the right of, and defer to, parents and legal custodians as the primary decision-makers and source of their children's education in regard to learning morals, ethics, civic responsibilities, social values, political and religious beliefs, emotional or sexual development, health and medical decisions, and sexual and gender beliefs.
   (B) For purposes of this section: 
      (1) "Place of learning" means a public, charter, or private childcare facility, preschool, elementary, middle, secondary, postsecondary school, or institution of higher learning that receives funds or grants that originate from the State of South Carolina, whether in whole or in part, directly from State agencies or indirectly from an intermediary entity.
      (2) "State-funded education entity" (SFEE) means an entity that receives funds or grants that originate from the State of South Carolina, whether in whole or in part, directly from State agencies or indirectly from an intermediary entity, and includes: 
         (a) a place of learning;
         (b) a public or private institution, organization, or business engaged in providing accreditation, licensing, professional development, training services, instructional or reading materials, surveys, questionnaires, screenings, or any supplemental resources such as school or class library content in any format to a place of learning or its employees; or
         (c) an "overseeing authority," which includes a state or local agency, school board, school authorizer or sponsor, board of directors, or similar entity having administrative or oversight duties over entities (a) or (b) above.
      (3) "State Board" means the South Carolina State Board of Education.
      (4) "Harmful to minors" and "sexual activity" have the same meanings as defined in Title 16, Chapter 15, Article 3, in particular Section 16-15-375 except as modified for purposes of this Act in subsection (D)(5)(a) below.
   (C) The General Assembly hereby affirms that under the principles enshrined in the Declaration of Independence, United States Constitution, Civil Rights Act of 1964, Constitution of South Carolina, and the South Carolina Human Affairs Law found in Chapter 13, Title 1, the following concepts are discriminatory, violate the Constitutional and statutory rights of individuals, and are contrary and inimical to the intentions enumerated in subsection (A)(1):
      (1) one race or biological sex is inherently superior or inferior to another race or biological sex;
      (2) a group or an individual, by virtue of his or her race, ethnicity, color, biological sex, sexual orientation, national origin, heritage, culture, religion, or political belief is inherently racist, sexist, bigoted, ignorant, biased, fragile, privileged, oppressive, or contributive to any oppression, whether consciously or unconsciously;
      (3) an individual or group should receive adverse or favorable treatment, or be discriminated against solely or partly because of his or her race, ethnicity, color, biological sex, sexual orientation, national origin, heritage, culture, religion, or political belief;
      (4) members of one race, biological sex, color, or ethnicity cannot and should not attempt to treat, relate to, advise, or instruct others without respect to race, biological sex, color, ethnicity, or culture, or that individuals should be separated in accordance with race, color, or ethnicity for purposes of employment, instruction, training, living arrangements, or any other activities;
      (5) an individual's moral character, value, or status, whether wholly or partly, is necessarily determined by his or her race, ethnicity, color, biological sex, national origin, heritage, culture, religion, or political belief;
      (6) an individual, by virtue of his or her race, biological sex, color, ethnicity, or heritage, bears responsibility, or must confess or atone for actions committed in the past by other members of the same race, biological sex, or ethnic group;
      (7) an individual should be made to feel shame, guilt, anguish, or any other form of psychological distress because of his or her race, color, ethnicity, biological sex, national origin, heritage, culture, religion, or political belief;
      (8) traits, behaviors, or concepts such as meritocracy, a hard work ethic, punctuality, use of standard English language, sense of urgency, pursuit of excellence, valuing the written word, individualism, logic, and objectivity are racist or sexist, or were created by a particular race or group to oppress another race or group; and
      (9) an individual must be compelled to affirm, accept, adopt, profess, or adhere to concepts, forms of language, or definitions not firmly and widely established, empirically or scientifically accurate, or that are controversial or theoretical, such as:
         (a) gender theory, including nonbinary pronouns or honorifics;
         (b) unconscious or implicit bias; or
         (c) that race or biological sex are social constructs;
   (D) A state-funded education entity, including its employees and volunteers, shall not: 
      (1) promote, engage in, or treat individuals in accordance with, the discriminatory concepts of subsection (C);
      (2) direct or otherwise compel individuals to personally affirm, accept, adopt, profess, or adhere to the discriminatory concepts of subsection (C);
      (3) conduct, sponsor, encourage, or require individuals to participate in instruction, presentations, discussions, trainings, questionnaires, surveys, clubs, counseling, or activities that affirm or promote the discriminatory concepts of subsection (C), whether as part of a lesson, assigned or suggested materials made available in any format or setting, conducted on premises, remotely, or by a third party;
      (4) conduct instruction that:
         (a) teaches theoretical ideas or uncorroborated claims as factual;
         (b) materially distorts or misrepresents verifiable historical facts;
         (c) inculcates, coerces, pressures, or encourages students into accepting or affirming a particular ideology or political belief, or participating in social or political activism such as protesting, marching, lobbying, or writing campaigns;
         (d) offers course credit, incentives, or favorable consideration for participating in social or political activism;
         (e) advertises, promotes, or endorses social or political ideologies, causes, movements, organizations, or political candidates;
         (f) creates an atmosphere hostile to open and respectful inquiry and discussion, or that demeans, marginalizes, or penalizes individuals for expressing differing viewpoints, especially about controversial issues;
         (g) promotes or endorses the concept of "equity," defined as treating different individuals or groups unequally to achieve equal or similar outcomes, as this concept violates nondiscriminatory statutes and is contrary to America's foundational underpinnings of equality, equality before the law, and the role of equality in the United States Constitution; or
         (h) promotes or endorses narratives that:
            (i)   the United States was founded for the purpose of oppression, that the American Revolution was fought for the purpose of protecting oppression, or that United States history is a story defined by oppression; or
            (ii) with respect to their relationship to American values, slavery and racism are anything other than deviations from, betrayals of, or failures to live up to, the authentic founding principles of the United States, which include liberty and equality; or
      (5) subjects minors under the age of eighteen to instruction, presentations, displays, performances, discussions, assignments, questionnaires, surveys, or materials in any medium made available in any format or setting, including making access available through online services, school or class libraries, book fairs, or catalogs that violate students' privacy or that involve or contain the following age-inappropriate content, which is reserved for parents and legal custodians to discuss with, and explain to, their children in accordance with their family values and, if they elect to, with health professionals of their choosing:
         (a) sexually explicit or obscene materials in accordance with Title 16, Chapter 15, Article 3, or materials using obscene or profane language in accordance with Title 16, Chapter 17, in particular Section 16-17-530. For purposes of this section, materials shall be considered age-inappropriate and harmful to minors if sexually explicit and obscene content or profane language is present in any portion of the materials; and, claims that when taken as a whole the content has serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value shall not apply and shall not exempt the materials from being considered harmful to minors;
         (b) concepts or instruction on sexual activity, sexual orientation, gender theory, gender identity, gender multiplicity, or gender expression, except as may be needed for exclusively teaching the public health model of sexual risk avoidance education and human biological reproduction as part of a larger unit of study in grades 9 through 12; or
         (c) curricula, initiatives, programs, or activities that:
            (i) undermine, denigrate, question, or minimize the abilities, rights, or role of parents, legal custodians, or family as the primary educators and caregivers of their children;
            (ii) engage in, prompt, suggest, or encourage minors to reveal or discuss personal information in the presence of other students or staff, whether as part of a lesson, discussion, written assignment, club, survey, questionnaire, or any other format or setting. The collection, retention, disclosure, or dissemination of such information about students is strictly prohibited. For purposes of this section, personal information shall means the student's or student family's:
               (1) political beliefs or affiliations;
               (2) mental, physical, or emotional health or well-being;
               (3) behavior, attitudes, beliefs, observations, or associations about race, ethnicity, skin color, biological sex, gender identity, gender expression, or sexual orientation; 
               (4) illegal, anti-social, self-incriminating, or demeaning behavior;
               (5) legally recognized or analogous relationships, such as those of lawyers, physicians, and ministers;
               (6) religious practices, affiliations, or beliefs; or
               (7) income (other than that required by law to determine eligibility for participation in a program or receiving financial assistance under such program); or
            (iii) engage minors in therapy or psychological interventions whether in a group or as individuals, except for counseling strictly limited to school-related academics, career or course advice, or addressing school disciplinary issues. Such counseling shall be conducted only upon obtaining express written authorization in advance from the minor's parents or legal custodians in which the consent clearly and accurately states the nature, extent, and duration of the counseling;
               (6) withhold from a parent or legal custodian information about any activities, instruction, counseling, or discussions about any subject including mental, emotional, or physical health or well-being; or
               (7) encourage or adopt procedures that have the effect of encouraging a student to withhold from a parent or legal custodian information about any activities, instruction, counseling, or discussions about any subject including mental, emotional, or physical health or well-being.
   (E)(1) Reporting of violations of subsection (D) and enforcement of this act shall occur in the following order:
         (a) Any individual listed in subsection (E)(6), here forth referred to as the complainant, may report alleged violations to the head of the respective SFEE, or his designee. Multiple violations may be submitted in a single report and shall each count as individual violations. To be deemed valid, reports of alleged violations must be submitted in writing and accompanied by documentary, tangible, or testimonial evidence and may not rely on hearsay. The SFEE shall promptly investigate each alleged violation and issue a formal written response to the complainant within fifteen days of receiving his report. Confidentiality of all parties shall be maintained throughout the investigation. The SFEE shall not engage in any adverse treatment of the complainant. If the alleged violation is found valid, the SFEE shall take immediate corrective action, which shall include:
            (i) removing all materials found in violation, discontinuing any such instruction, programs, initiatives, or activities;
            (ii) upon first offense, issuing a written warning to the individual responsible for the violation. Upon a subsequent offense, taking disciplinary action consistent with other employment policy infractions, which shall include as a minimum suspension of duties and up to and including termination depending on the severity of the violation. Violation of this section by an educator shall be considered a violation of the South Carolina Educator's Standards of Conduct that justifies disciplinary sanction by the State Board of Education in accordance with applicable regulations promulgated by the State Board. For the purposes of this section, "educator" means a professional employee of any place of learning whose position requires certification by the State Board and includes administrators and specialists. Violations involving dissemination of materials harmful to minors in subsection (C)(5)(a), shall be enforced in accordance with applicable sections of Title 16, Chapter 15, Article 3;
            (iii) notifying all parents and employees of the SFEE of the violation and corrective action taken. Confidentiality of all parties shall be maintained; and
            (iv) notifying the State Board of the violation and corrective action taken. Confidentiality of the complainant shall be maintained. The State Board shall maintain a record of all such violations and provide an annual written report to the General Assembly indicating the quantity and nature of all violations reported and the SFEEs involved.
         (b) If the complainant or defending party do not agree with the SFEE's determination or if corrective action is not immediately taken, they may appeal to the SFEE's overseeing authority, if one exists, within sixty days of receiving the determination. The overseeing authority shall review the report, maintaining confidentiality of all parties, and issue a formal written response within fifteen days. If the report is found valid, the overseeing authority shall compel the SFEE to take immediate corrective action in accordance with subsection (E)(1)(a).
         (c) If the complainant does not agree with the SFEE's overseeing authority's determination, or if the SFEE does not take immediate corrective action when so directed by the overseeing authority, he may appeal to the State Attorney General within sixty days of receiving the determination. The Attorney General shall, within thirty days of receiving the appeal, investigate the violation report while maintaining confidentiality of all parties. If the Attorney General finds the SFEE violated a provision of this section, he shall issue a written and detailed Notice of Noncompliance to the SFEE and its overseeing authority stating the nature of the violation and results of the investigation. The SFEE shall have fifteen days from receiving the notice to demonstrate compliance through taking corrective action satisfactory to the Attorney General and in accordance with subsection (E)(1)(a), or to dispute the violation in writing. Failure to respond shall be deemed admission of noncompliance. Upon reviewing the entity's response, the Attorney General may dismiss the violation or determine that the noncompliance stands, in which case his office shall file a court action seeking full enforcement under this section. An SFEE found by the court to have violated a provision of this section must, for each violation, lose twenty percent of its state funding including grant amounts, until it demonstrates compliance to the Attorney General. Funding withheld pursuant to this subsection shall be retroactive to the date of Notice of Noncompliance, must be forfeited, and may not be repaid unless the SFEE successfully demonstrates full compliance with this section without further violations for a period of twelve consecutive months after the court's ruling. The loss of funding and grant money pursuant to this subsection must be prorated and returned by the SFEE to the Office of the State Treasurer within forty-five days of the court's ruling. 
         (d) Violation of this section by an educator shall be considered a violation of the South Carolina Educator's Standards of Conduct that justifies disciplinary sanction by the State Board of Education in accordance with its regulations. For the purposes of this section, educator means a professional employee of any place of learning whose position requires certification by the State Board and includes administrators and specialists.
         (e) Students enrolled in a public place of learning up to and including grade twelve that has been determined by a court to be in violation of subsections (C) or (D) and that, as a result, has lost any portion of its state funding or grant money, shall have the right to transfer to another public place of learning within reasonable distance. The students' school transportation, or transportation costs, shall be provided or paid for by the SFEE found to be in violation.
      (2) Funding, loans, grants, assistance of any type, curricula, instructional materials, professional development courses, training, presentations, programs, activities, books, media or resources of any type in any format accepted from federal or other third-party sources, whether public or private, by an SFEE shall be in full compliance with this section. Any violations shall be subject to enforcement in accordance with subsection (E)(1), and additionally, if determined to be in noncompliance, all third-party funding, grants, and resources shall be returned. The South Carolina Department of Education, the State Board, public school districts, and all state government agencies overseeing places of learning are prohibited from accepting any third-party funding or resources that violate subsections (C) or (D).
      (3) Within thirty days after the effective date of this section, an SFEE shall:
         (a) post a notice of this adopted law at a conspicuous location where it will be available to all employees, applicants, students, and parents of students; and
         (b) send an email or letter notification to all its employees, students, and parents of students with the complete text of this law, and subsequently, places of learning shall send such a notification within thirty days of the start of every academic year.
      (4) To ensure transparency of instruction, every place of learning up to and including grade twelve shall:
         (a) within ninety days after the effective date of this section, make readily available to the public on its website and as a printed document upon request, the full list of classes, curricula with lesson units, reading materials, including title, author, and publisher, resources, including online, video or audio materials, field trips, presentations, and materials regardless of media format that are used for student instruction, including primary and reference materials, made available in a library, media center, or online, or provided as staff training, workshop, or professional development. This information must be accessible to the public without requiring registration or use of a user name, password, or other user identification. This information must remain available for each current academic year and the immediately preceding academic year;
         (b) upon request, allow full access to parents or legal custodians of students enrolled in the place of learning to review in person any instructional materials, books, media, content in libraries, media centers, or classroom collections, or materials used in staff professional trainings. Access may be scheduled so as not to disrupt student instruction but shall not be unreasonably denied or delayed; and
         (c) before administering any student questionnaire, survey, or screening form, provide the questionnaire, survey, or screening form to the parent or legal custodian at least fifteen days in advance for their review and obtain their written permission.
      (5) The provisions of this section shall not be construed to prohibit or abridge:
         (a) a person's First Amendment rights to the freedom of speech or to the teaching and free exercise of religion; or
         (b) the impartial teaching or discussion of public policy issues of the day; ideas that individuals may find unwelcome, disagreeable, or offensive; controversial aspects of history; or the historical existence of discriminatory concepts or scientifically unproven theories as part of a larger course of academic instruction, in an age-appropriate, objective, and viewpoint-neutral manner without endorsement.
      (6) During the process described in section (E)(1), the complainant, including any parent or legal custodian of a student, any emancipated minor student or adult student age eighteen or older, and any employee or volunteer of an SFEE shall have the right to refuse, or have his or her child refuse, to participate in any lessons, presentations, trainings, programs, assignments, activities, or be given access to any books, media, or content in any format that he or she believes violate one or more of the concepts or activities described in subsections (C) or (D). In order to exercise their opt-out right, those individuals shall submit a report of violation to the SFEE in accordance with section (E)(1)(a) within ten days of beginning their opt-out. An SFEE shall not subject such individuals or students to any adverse action, demerit, warning, or discipline of any kind unless the process under section (E)(1) or (E)(7) determines a violation has not occurred and the individual continues to refuse to participate afterward. 
      (7)(a) Any person aggrieved by an act prohibited in subsections (C) or (D) may pursue all of the remedies available under South Carolina law, or any other applicable common law or statutory cause of action. A person pursuing a remedy pursuant to this section shall not be subject to any adverse action, demerit, warning, or discipline of any kind by the SFEE for pursuing such legal remedies or submitting a claim to the Attorney General under subsection (E)(1). The following individuals shall have a right to bring an appropriate action before a court of competent jurisdiction in accordance with subsection (E)(1) seeking to enjoin an alleged violation of any provision of subsections (C) and (D) of this Code section:
            (i) a student who has reached the age of majority or is a lawfully emancipated minor and who is enrolled at the place of learning where the alleged violation occurred;
            (ii) a parent or custodian of a minor student who is enrolled at the place of learning where the alleged violation occurred;
            (iii) an individual employed or volunteering at any SFEE listed in subsection (B) of this code section where the alleged violation occurred; and
            (iv) the State Attorney General. 
         (b) In any legal action brought pursuant to this subsection, the court may award court costs and reasonable attorney's fees to the prevailing party.
      (8) Within six months of this section becoming law, the State Department of Education shall review and update, as necessary, school counseling frameworks and standards; educator practices and professional conduct principles; and any other student services personnel guidelines, standards, or frameworks in accordance with the requirements of this act.

SECTION 2.   If any section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, clause, phrase, or word of this act is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid, such holding shall not affect the constitutionality or validity of the remaining portions of this act, the General Assembly hereby declaring that it would have passed this act, and each and every section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, clause, phrase, and word thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more other sections, subsections, paragraphs, subparagraphs, sentences, clauses, phrases, or words hereof may be declared to be unconstitutional, invalid, or otherwise ineffective.

SECTION 3.   This act takes effect upon approval by the Governor.
----XX----
This web page was last updated on January 19, 2023 at 03:52 PM




HB 396  - AS INTRODUCED  2023 SESSION	23-0647	05/08 HOUSE BILL	396 AN ACT	relative to state recognition of biological sex. SPONSORS:	Rep. Kofalt, Hills. 32; Rep. A. Lekas, Hills. 38; Rep. Aron, Sull. 4; Rep. Prudhomme-O'Brien, Rock. 13; Rep. Sirois, Hills. 32; Rep. M. Pearson, Rock. 34; Rep. Notter, Hills. 12; Rep. Ammon, Hills. 42; Rep. Seidel, Hills. 29; Rep. DeSimone, Rock. 18; Sen. Avard, Dist 12 COMMITTEE:	Judiciary ----------------------------------------------------------------- ANALYSIS 	This bill provides that nothing in state law regarding birth records or motor vehicles is intended to prohibit a public entity from differentiating between male and female sexes or undermine the state's rational interest in recognizing the male and female sexes. - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -  Explanation:	Matter added to current law appears in bold italics.		Matter removed from current law appears [in brackets and struckthrough.]		Matter which is either (a) all new or (b) repealed and reenacted appears in regular type.	23-0647	05/08 STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE In the Year of Our Lord Two Thousand Twenty Three AN ACT	relative to state recognition of biological sex. Be it Enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives in General Court convened:  1  New Paragraph; Vital Records Administration; Amendments and Corrections to Birth Records; Recognition of Biological Sex.  Amend RSA 5-C:87 by inserting after paragraph XI the following new paragraph:		XII.  Nothing in this subdivision is intended to prohibit any public entity from differentiating between the male and female sexes in athletic competitions, criminal incarceration, or places of intimate privacy, or otherwise to deny or undermine the state’s rational interest in recognizing the male and female sexes.  In this paragraph, “the male and female sexes” refers to biologically male and female human beings. 2  New Section; Administration of Motor Vehicle Laws; State Recognition of Biological Sex.  Amend RSA 260 by inserting after section 21-b the following new section:	260:21-c  State Recognition of Biological Sex.  Nothing in RSA 260, RSA 263, or any related provision of law, is intended to prohibit any public entity from differentiating between the male and female sexes in athletic competitions, criminal incarceration, or places of intimate privacy, or otherwise to deny or undermine the state’s rational interest in recognizing the male and female sexes.  In this paragraph, “the male and female sexes” refers to biologically male and female human beings. 3  Effective Date.  This act shall take effect 60 days after its passage.


 
88R3966 MM-D


 


 

		By: Patterson
H.B. No. 1155




 


 



 		
			

A BILL TO BE ENTITLED




 
			

AN ACT




 
			
relating to parental rights in public education and prohibiting 



 
			
instruction regarding sexual orientation or gender identity for 



 
			
certain public school students.



 
			
       BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF TEXAS:



 
			
       SECTION 1.  Chapter 26, Education Code, is amended by adding 



 
			
Section 26.0083 to read as follows:



 
			
       Sec. 26.0083.  RIGHT TO INFORMATION REGARDING MENTAL, 



 
			
EMOTIONAL, AND PHYSICAL HEALTH AND HEALTH-RELATED SERVICES.  (a)  



 
			
Each school district shall adopt a procedure for notifying the 



 
			
parent of a student enrolled in the district regarding any change 



 
			
in:



 
			
             (1)  services provided to or monitoring of the student 



 
			
related to the student's mental, emotional, or physical health or 



 
			
well-being; or



 
			
             (2)  the district's ability to provide a safe and 



 
			
supportive learning environment for the student. 



 
			
       (b)  A procedure adopted under Subsection (a) must reinforce 



 
			
the fundamental right of a parent to make decisions regarding the 



 
			
upbringing and control of the parent's child by requiring school 



 
			
district personnel to:



 
			
             (1)  encourage a student to discuss issues relating to 



 
			
the student's well-being with the student's parent; or



 
			
             (2)  facilitate a discussion described under 



 
			
Subdivision (1).



 
			
       (c)  A school district may not adopt a procedure or a student 



 
			
support form, including a student well-being questionnaire or 



 
			
health screening form, that:



 
			
             (1)  prohibits a district employee from notifying the 



 
			
parent of a student regarding:



 
			
                   (A)  information about the student's mental, 



 
			
emotional, or physical health or well-being; or



 
			
                   (B)  a change in services provided to or 



 
			
monitoring of the student related to the student's mental, 



 
			
emotional, or physical health or well-being;



 
			
             (2)  encourages or has the effect of encouraging a 



 
			
student to withhold from the student's parent information described 



 
			
by Subdivision (1)(A); or



 
			
             (3)  prevents a parent from accessing education or 



 
			
health records concerning the parent's child.



 
			
       (d)  Subsections (a) and (c) do not require the disclosure of 



 
			
information to a parent if a reasonably prudent person would 



 
			
believe the disclosure is likely to result in the student suffering 



 
			
abuse or neglect, as those terms are defined by Section 261.001, 



 
			
Family Code.



 
			
       (e)  A school district employee may not discourage or 



 
			
prohibit parental knowledge of or involvement in critical decisions 



 
			
affecting a student's mental, emotional, or physical health or 



 
			
well-being.



 
			
       (f)  Any student support services training developed or 



 
			
provided by a school district to district employees must comply 



 
			
with any student services guidelines, standards, and frameworks 



 
			
established by the State Board of Education and the agency.



 
			
       (g)  Before the first instructional day of each school year, 



 
			
a school district shall provide to the parent of each student 



 
			
enrolled in the district written notice of each health-related 



 
			
service offered at the district campus the student attends.  The 



 
			
notice must include a statement of the parent's right to withhold 



 
			
consent for or decline a health-related service.  A parent's 



 
			
consent to a health-related service does not waive a requirement of 



 
			
Subsection (a), (c), or (e). 



 
			
       (h)  Before administering a student well-being questionnaire 



 
			
or health screening form to a student enrolled in kindergarten 



 
			
through eighth grade, a school district must provide a copy of the 



 
			
questionnaire or form to the student's parent and obtain the 



 
			
parent's consent to administer the questionnaire or form.



 
			
       (i)  This section may not be construed to limit or alter the 



 
			
requirements of Section 38.004 of this code or Chapter 261, Family 



 
			
Code.



 
			
       (j)  Not later than August 1, 2024, the agency, the State 



 
			
Board of Education, and the State Board for Educator Certification, 



 
			
as appropriate, shall review and revise as necessary the following 



 
			
to ensure compliance with this section:



 
			
             (1)  school counseling frameworks and standards;



 
			
             (2)  educator practices and professional conduct 



 
			
principles; and



 
			
             (3)  any other student services personnel guidelines, 



 
			
standards, or frameworks.



 
			
       (k)  Subsection (j) and this subsection expire September 1, 



 
			
2025.



 
			
       SECTION 2.  Subchapter A, Chapter 28, Education Code, is 



 
			
amended by adding Section 28.0043 to read as follows:



 
			
       Sec. 28.0043.  RESTRICTION ON INSTRUCTION REGARDING SEXUAL 



 
			
ORIENTATION AND GENDER IDENTITY.  A school district, 



 
			
open-enrollment charter school, or district or charter school 



 
			
employee may not provide or allow a third party to provide 



 
			
instruction regarding sexual orientation or gender identity:



 
			
             (1)  to students enrolled in kindergarten through 



 
			
eighth grade; or



 
			
             (2)  in a manner that is not age-appropriate or 



 
			
developmentally appropriate.



 
			
       SECTION 3.  Section 12.104(b), Education Code, as amended by 



 
			
Chapters 542 (S.B. 168), 887 (S.B. 1697), 915 (H.B. 3607), 974 (S.B. 



 
			
2081), and 1046 (S.B. 1365), Acts of the 87th Legislature, Regular 



 
			
Session, 2021, is reenacted and amended to read as follows:



 
			
       (b)  An open-enrollment charter school is subject to:



 
			
             (1)  a provision of this title establishing a criminal 



 
			
offense;



 
			
             (2)  the provisions in Chapter 554, Government Code; 



 
			
and



 
			
             (3)  a prohibition, restriction, or requirement, as 



 
			
applicable, imposed by this title or a rule adopted under this 



 
			
title, relating to:



 
			
                   (A)  the Public Education Information Management 



 
			
System (PEIMS) to the extent necessary to monitor compliance with 



 
			
this subchapter as determined by the commissioner;



 
			
                   (B)  criminal history records under Subchapter C, 



 
			
Chapter 22;



 
			
                   (C)  reading instruments and accelerated reading 



 
			
instruction programs under Section 28.006;



 
			
                   (D)  accelerated instruction under Section 



 
			
28.0211;



 
			
                   (E)  high school graduation requirements under 



 
			
Section 28.025;



 
			
                   (F)  special education programs under Subchapter 



 
			
A, Chapter 29;



 
			
                   (G)  bilingual education under Subchapter B, 



 
			
Chapter 29;



 
			
                   (H)  prekindergarten programs under Subchapter E 



 
			
or E-1, Chapter 29, except class size limits for prekindergarten 



 
			
classes imposed under Section 25.112, which do not apply;



 
			
                   (I)  extracurricular activities under Section 



 
			
33.081;



 
			
                   (J)  discipline management practices or behavior 



 
			
management techniques under Section 37.0021;



 
			
                   (K)  health and safety under Chapter 38;



 
			
                   (L)  the provisions of Subchapter A, Chapter 39;



 
			
                   (M)  public school accountability and special 



 
			
investigations under Subchapters A, B, C, D, F, G, and J, Chapter 



 
			
39, and Chapter 39A;



 
			
                   (N)  the requirement under Section 21.006 to 



 
			
report an educator's misconduct;



 
			
                   (O)  intensive programs of instruction under 



 
			
Section 28.0213;



 
			
                   (P)  the right of a school employee to report a 



 
			
crime, as provided by Section 37.148;



 
			
                   (Q)  bullying prevention policies and procedures 



 
			
under Section 37.0832;



 
			
                   (R)  the right of a school under Section 37.0052 



 
			
to place a student who has engaged in certain bullying behavior in a 



 
			
disciplinary alternative education program or to expel the student;



 
			
                   (S)  the right under Section 37.0151 to report to 



 
			
local law enforcement certain conduct constituting assault or 



 
			
harassment;



 
			
                   (T)  a parent's right to information regarding the 



 
			
provision of assistance for learning difficulties to the parent's 



 
			
child as provided by Sections 26.004(b)(11) and 26.0081(c) and (d);



 
			
                   (U)  establishment of residency under Section 



 
			
25.001;



 
			
                   (V)  school safety requirements under Sections 



 
			
37.108, 37.1081, 37.1082, 37.109, 37.113, 37.114, 37.1141, 37.115, 



 
			
37.207, and 37.2071;



 
			
                   (W)  the early childhood literacy and mathematics 



 
			
proficiency plans under Section 11.185;



 
			
                   (X)  the college, career, and military readiness 



 
			
plans under Section 11.186; [and]



 
			
                   (Y) [(X)]  parental options to retain a student 



 
			
under Section 28.02124; and



 
			
                   (Z)  parental rights to information regarding a 



 
			
student's mental, emotional, and physical health and 



 
			
health-related services offered by the school as provided by 



 
			
Section 26.0083.



 
			
       SECTION 4.  This Act applies beginning with the 2023-2024 



 
			
school year.



 
			
       SECTION 5.  To the extent of any conflict, this Act prevails 



 
			
over another Act of the 88th Legislature, Regular Session, 2023, 



 
			
relating to nonsubstantive additions to and corrections in enacted 



 
			
codes.



 
			
       SECTION 6.  This Act takes effect immediately if it receives 



 
			
a vote of two-thirds of all the members elected to each house, as 



 
			
provided by Section 39, Article III, Texas Constitution.  If this 



 
			
Act does not receive the vote necessary for immediate effect, this 



 
			
Act takes effect September 1, 2023.





House
File
180
-
Introduced


HOUSE
FILE
180


BY
COMMITTEE
ON
EDUCATION


(SUCCESSOR
TO
HF
9)


A
BILL
FOR


An
Act
relating
to
parental
and
guardian
consent
and
1


information
regarding
the
gender
identity
of
students
2


enrolled
in
a
school
district
or
charter
school.
3


BE
IT
ENACTED
BY
THE
GENERAL
ASSEMBLY
OF
THE
STATE
OF
IOWA:
4


TLSB
1685HV
(1)
90


jda/jh




H.F.
180


Section
1.
Section
256E.7,
subsection
2,
Code
2023,
is
1


amended
by
adding
the
following
new
paragraph:
2


NEW
PARAGRAPH


.
0j.
Be
subject
to
and
comply
with
the
3


requirements
of
section
279.77
relating
to
prohibited
actions
4


associated
with
the
gender
identity
of
students
in
the
same
5


manner
as
a
school
district.
6


Sec.
2.
NEW
SECTION
.
279.77
Gender
identity
——
parental
or
7


guardian
consent
——
prohibitions.
8


Each
school
district
is
prohibited
from
doing
any
of
the
9


following:
10


1.
Facilitating
any
accommodation
that
is
intended
to
11


affirm
a
student’s
gender
identity,
if
that
gender
identity
12


is
different
than
the
sex
listed
on
the
student’s
official
13


birth
certificate
or
certificate
issued
upon
adoption
if
the
14


certificate
was
issued
at
or
near
the
time
of
the
student’s
15


birth,
without
the
written
consent
of
the
student’s
parent
or
16


guardian.
For
purposes
of
this
section,
“gender
identity”
means
17


the
same
as
defined
in
section
216.2.
18


2.
Encouraging
or
coercing
any
student
to
withhold
19


information
from
the
student’s
parent
or
guardian
related
to
20


the
student’s
gender
identity.
21


3.
Willfully
withholding
information
from,
or
knowingly
22


giving
false
or
misleading
information
to,
the
parent
or
23


guardian
of
a
student
regarding
the
student’s
gender
identity
24


or
intention
to
transition
to
a
gender
that
is
different
than
25


the
sex
listed
on
a
student’s
official
birth
certificate
or
26


certificate
issued
upon
adoption
if
the
certificate
was
issued
27


at
or
near
the
time
of
the
student’s
birth.
28


4.
Encouraging,
pressuring,
or
coercing
a
student
to
29


undergo
any
medical
procedure,
treatment,
or
intervention
that
30


is
designed
to
affirm
the
student’s
gender
identity
if
that
31


gender
identity
is
different
than
the
sex
listed
on
a
student’s
32


official
birth
certificate
or
certificate
issued
upon
adoption
33


if
the
certificate
was
issued
at
or
near
the
time
of
the
34


student’s
birth.
35


-1-


LSB
1685HV
(1)
90


jda/jh


1/
3






H.F.
180


5.
Encouraging,
pressuring,
or
coercing
a
student’s
1


parent
or
guardian
to
allow
the
student
to
undergo
any
medical
2


procedure,
treatment,
or
intervention
that
is
designed
to
3


affirm
the
student’s
gender
identity
if
that
gender
identity
4


is
different
than
the
sex
listed
on
the
student’s
official
5


birth
certificate
or
certificate
issued
upon
adoption
if
the
6


certificate
was
issued
at
or
near
the
time
of
the
student’s
7


birth.
8


EXPLANATION
9


The
inclusion
of
this
explanation
does
not
constitute
agreement
with
10


the
explanation’s
substance
by
the
members
of
the
general
assembly.
11


This
bill
relates
to
parental
and
guardian
consent
and
12


information
regarding
the
gender
identity
of
students
enrolled
13


in
a
school
district
or
charter
school.
14


The
bill
prohibits
school
districts
and
charter
schools
15


from
facilitating
any
accommodation
that
is
intended
to
16


affirm
a
student’s
gender
identity,
if
that
gender
identity
17


is
different
than
the
sex
listed
on
the
student’s
official
18


birth
certificate,
without
the
written
consent
of
the
student’s
19


parent
or
guardian;
encouraging
or
coercing
any
student
to
20


withhold
information
from
the
student’s
parent
or
guardian
21


related
to
the
student’s
gender
identity;
willfully
withholding
22


information
from,
or
knowingly
giving
false
or
misleading
23


information
to,
the
parent
or
guardian
of
a
student
regarding
24


the
student’s
gender
identity
or
intention
to
transition
to
a
25


gender
that
is
different
than
the
sex
listed
on
a
student’s
26


official
birth
certificate;
encouraging,
pressuring,
or
27


coercing
a
student
to
undergo
any
medical
procedure,
treatment,
28


or
intervention
that
is
designed
to
affirm
the
student’s
29


gender
identity
if
that
gender
identity
is
different
than
30


the
sex
listed
on
a
student’s
official
birth
certificate;
31


or
encouraging,
pressuring,
or
coercing
a
student’s
parent
32


or
guardian
to
allow
the
student
to
undergo
any
medical
33


procedure,
treatment,
or
intervention
that
is
designed
to
34


affirm
the
student’s
gender
identity
if
that
gender
identity
is
35


-2-


LSB
1685HV
(1)
90


jda/jh


2/
3




H.F.
180


different
than
the
sex
listed
on
the
student’s
official
birth
1


certificate.
2


The
bill
defines
“gender
identity”
as
a
gender-related
3


identity
of
a
person,
regardless
of
the
person’s
assigned
sex
4


at
birth.
5


-3-


LSB
1685HV
(1)
90


jda/jh


3/
3








2023-2024 Bill 364 Text of Previous Version (Jan. 10, 2023) - South Carolina Legislature Online
 

South Carolina General Assembly125th Session, 2023-2024Bill 364Indicates Matter StrickenIndicates New Matter(Text matches printed bills. Document has been reformatted to meet World Wide Web specifications.)








A bill

TO AMEND THE SOUTH CAROLINA CODE OF LAWS BY AMENDING SECTION 44-63-100, RELATING TO THE PROCESS THROUGH WHICH A PERSON MAY MAKE CHANGES TO HIS BIRTH CERTIFICATE, SO AS TO PROVIDE THAT GENDER CHANGES TO A PERSON'S BIRTH CERTIFICATE MAY ONLY BE TO CHANGE FROM MALE TO FEMALE OR FROM FEMALE TO MALE AND TO PROVIDE FOR AFFIDAVITS THAT MUST ACCOMPANY A PETITION TO MAKE A GENDER CHANGE TO A PERSON'S BIRTH CERTIFICATE.

Be it enacted by the General Assembly of the State of South Carolina:

SECTION 1.   Section 44-63-100 of the S.C. Code is amended to read:

   Section 44-63-100.   (A) For the purposes of this section:
      (1)   "Biological sex" means the biological indication of male and female in the context of reproductive potential or capacity such as sex chromosomes, naturally occurring sex hormones, gonads, and nonambiguous internal and external genitalia present at birth, without regard to an individual's psychological, chosen, or subjective experience of gender.
      (2) "Gender" means the psychological, behavioral, social, and cultural aspects of being male or female. Gender may only be male or female.
      (3) "Gender change" means a change in gender from the gender corresponding with one's biological sex to the gender corresponding with the opposite biological sex following a gender change procedure.
      (4) "Gender change procedure" means any medical or surgical service, including, but not limited to, physician's services, inpatient or outpatient hospital services, or prescribed drugs that seeks to:
         (a) alter or remove physical or anatomical characteristics or features that are typical for a person's biological sex; or
         (b) instill or create anatomical characteristics that resemble a sex different from the individual's biological sex, including, but not limited to, medical services that provide puberty blocking drugs, cross-sex hormones, or other mechanisms to promote the development of masculinizing or feminizing features in the opposite biological sex, or genital or non-genital change surgery performed for the purpose of assisting an individual with a gender change.
   (B) A petition may be filed in the South Carolina family court of petitioner's residence, or if petitioner no longer resides in South Carolina, in a court of competent jurisdiction in the state of petitioner's residence, for an order establishing a record of the name at birth, subsequent name changes, gender at birth, gender changes, date of birth, county of birth, and the full name of the mother prior to any marriages, and the full name of the biological father of the person whose birth is sought to be registered by way of a Delayed Certificate of Birth Established by Court Order.
   (B)(C) The petition must allege that the person for whom a delayed certificate of birth is sought was born in this State, that no record of birth exists, and that the petitioner has failed to produce the minimum required documentation to the State Registrar of Vital Statistics for an administrative establishment of a delayed birth certificate.  A certification from the State Registrar of Vital Statistics must be attached to the petition stating that no birth record has been located in the records of this State.  This certification must be dated less than two years before the petitions' filing date.
   (C)(D) The petitioner shall serve a certified copy of the filed petition on the State Registrar of Vital Statistics at least thirty days before a scheduled hearing.  The court shall fix the time and place of the hearing on the petition for establishment of birth registration, and at least ten days' notice in writing must be given to the State Registrar of Vital Statistics.
   (D)(E) The court shall determine, and the order must include, the registrant's name at birth, subsequent name changes, gender at birth, gender changes, the date of birth, the county of birth, the full name of the mother prior to any marriages, the full name of the biological father, and additional findings as the court considers necessary.  The order also must include a description of the evidence presented to the court.  The order must be forwarded by the clerk of court to the State Registrar no later than thirty days following the month in which the order was entered by the court.
   (F) A petition for gender change must be accompanied by an affidavit on a form prepared by the Department of Health and Environmental Control from the petitioner and an affidavit from a licensed physician attesting that the petitioner has undergone a gender change procedure. The affidavits must both state that, as a result of the gender change procedure:
      (1) there has been a physical change to the person's biological sex that corresponds with the opposite biological sex;
      (2) medical treatment necessary to complete the gender change is complete except for ongoing procedures or treatments necessary to maintain the gender change; and
      (3) the gender change is permanent.

SECTION 2.    The Department of Health and Environmental Control shall promulgate regulations concerning the affidavit referred to in Section 44-63-100(F) as added by this act.

SECTION 3.   This act takes effect upon approval by the Governor.
----XX----
This web page was last updated on January 10, 2023 at 12:55 PM





 
88R3473 BPG-D


 


 

		By: Hall, Campbell
S.C.R. No. 3




 


 



 		
			

CONCURRENT RESOLUTION




 		
			
       WHEREAS, The American Academy of Pediatrics, American 



 
			
Medical Association, and Children's Hospital Association wrote a 



 
			
letter to the United States Attorney General on October 3, 2022, 



 
			
requesting a Department of Justice investigation of organizations, 



 
			
individuals, and entities that advocate against what they term 



 
			
"gender-affirming health care"; and



 
			
       WHEREAS, "Gender-affirming care" is an unconscionable 



 
			
misnomer for the abhorrent practice of genital mutilation and the 



 
			
administration of puberty blockers to children who can not even 



 
			
legally smoke cigarettes; such "care" leads to irreparable harm, 



 
			
psychological damage, and a lifetime of trauma; and



 
			
       WHEREAS, The defenders of "gender-affirming" treatment wish 



 
			
to silence the voices of those who have undergone gender 



 
			
transitions and are left with immense, debilitating regret; they 



 
			
ignore that other countries have examined the issue of whether 



 
			
minors can adequately understand and properly consent to 



 
			
"gender-affirming care"; in a landmark 2020 High Court decision in 



 
			
the United Kingdom, the court ruled that the capacity to legally 



 
			
consent to taking puberty blockers was "highly unlikely" for 



 
			
13-year-olds and "doubtful" for 14- and 15-year-olds; 



 
			
consequently, the use of puberty blockers was suspended for 



 
			
children under the age of 16; and



 
			
       WHEREAS, In July 2022, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration 



 
			
issued a warning regarding gonadotropin-releasing hormone 



 
			
agonists, commonly known as puberty blockers; the FDA identified a 



 
			
plausible association between GnRH agonist use and pseudotumor 



 
			
cerebri, also known as idiopathic intracranial hypertension, which 



 
			
occurs when pressure inside the skull spontaneously increases; the 



 
			
condition can cause brain swelling, severe headaches, nausea, 



 
			
double vision, and even permanent vision loss, according to the 



 
			
Mayo Clinic; and



 
			
       WHEREAS, "Gender-affirming care" is a dangerous practice 



 
			
that destroys lives, and those who would suppress opposition to 



 
			
such treatment are deserving of the harshest censure; now, 



 
			
therefore, be it



 
			
       RESOLVED, That the 88th Legislature of the State of Texas 



 
			
hereby express support for ending "gender-affirming care" and 



 
			
condemn the American Academy of Pediatrics, American Medical 



 
			
Association, and Children's Hospital Association for their attempt 



 
			
to suppress objections to such treatment.





 
88R1595 EAS-D


 


 

		By: Hall, Campbell, Perry
S.B. No. 249




 


 



 		
			

A BILL TO BE ENTITLED




 
			

AN ACT




 
			
relating to the offense of genital mutilation.



 
			
       BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF TEXAS:



 
			
       SECTION 1.  The heading to Chapter 167, Health and Safety 



 
			
Code, is amended to read as follows:



 
			
CHAPTER 167.  [FEMALE] GENITAL MUTILATION



 
			
       SECTION 2.  The heading to Section 167.001, Health and 



 
			
Safety Code, is amended to read as follows:



 
			
       Sec. 167.001.  [FEMALE] GENITAL MUTILATION PROHIBITED.



 
			
       SECTION 3.  Section 167.001, Health and Safety Code, is 



 
			
amended by amending Subsections (a), (c), and (d) and adding 



 
			
Subsections (a-1), (e), and (f) to read as follows:



 
			
       (a)  A person commits an offense if the person:



 
			
             (1)  knowingly performs a procedure described by 



 
			
Subsection (a-1) on [circumcises, excises, or infibulates any part 



 
			
of the labia majora or labia minora or clitoris of] another person 



 
			
who is younger than 18 years of age;



 
			
             (2)  is a parent, caretaker, or legal guardian of 



 
			
another person who is younger than 18 years of age and knowingly 



 
			
consents to or facilitates a procedure described by Subsection 



 
			
(a-1) [permits an act described by Subdivision (1)] to be performed 



 
			
on that person; or



 
			
             (3)  knowingly transports or facilitates the 



 
			
transportation of another person who is younger than 18 years of age 



 
			
within this state or from this state for the purpose of having a 



 
			
procedure described by Subsection (a-1) [an act described by 



 
			
Subdivision (1)] performed on that person.



 
			
       (a-1)  This section applies only to a procedure that involves 



 
			
the partial or total removal of, or other injury to, the genitals of 



 
			
a person, including the following genital surgeries:



 
			
             (1)  clitorectomy, clitoroplasty, clitoral reduction, 



 
			
and clitoral recession, including corporal-sparing procedures;



 
			
             (2)  vaginoplasty, introitoplasty, vaginal 



 
			
exteriorization, and partial or total urogenital sinus 



 
			
mobilization;



 
			
             (3)  labiaplasty and labial reduction;



 
			
             (4)  hypospadias surgery, relocation of the urethral 



 
			
meatus, and chordee release;



 
			
             (5)  phalloplasty; and



 
			
             (6)  gonadectomy, including of testes, ovaries, 



 
			
ovotestes, or streak gonads.



 
			
       (c)  It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (a) 



 
			
that:



 
			
             (1)  the person performing the procedure [act] is a 



 
			
physician or other licensed health care professional and the 



 
			
procedure [act] is within the scope of the person's license; and



 
			
             (2)  the procedure is: 



 
			
                   (A)  necessary for the person's physical health;



 
			
                   (B)  male circumcision; or



 
			
                   (C)  performed on an intersex person [act is 



 
			
performed for medical purposes].



 
			
       (d)  It is not a defense to prosecution under Subsection (a)



 
			
[this section] that the procedure is required as a matter of 



 
			
religion, custom, tradition, ritual, or standard practice[:



 
			
             [(1)  the person on whom the circumcision, excision, or 



 
			
infibulation was performed or was to be performed, or another 



 
			
person authorized to consent to medical treatment of that person, 



 
			
including that person's parent or legal guardian, consented to the 



 
			
circumcision, excision, or infibulation;



 
			
             [(2)  the circumcision, excision, or infibulation is 



 
			
required by a custom or practice of a particular group; or



 
			
             [(3)  the circumcision, excision, or infibulation was 



 
			
performed or was to be performed as part of or in connection with a 



 
			
religious or other ritual].



 
			
       (e)  In this section, "intersex person" means a person who:



 
			
             (1)  has inborn chromosomal, gonadal, genital, or 



 
			
endocrine characteristics, or a combination of those 



 
			
characteristics, that are not suited to the typical definition of 



 
			
male or female or are atypical for the determined sex of the person; 



 
			
or



 
			
             (2)  is considered by a medical professional to have 



 
			
inborn chromosomal, gonadal, genital, or endocrine characteristics 



 
			
that are ambiguous or atypical for the determined sex of the person.



 
			
       (f)  Title 4, Penal Code, applies to an offense under this 



 
			
section.



 
			
       SECTION 4.  The changes in law made by this Act apply only to 



 
			
an offense committed on or after the effective date of this Act.  An 



 
			
offense committed before the effective date of this Act is governed 



 
			
by the law in effect on the date the offense was committed, and the 



 
			
former law is continued in effect for that purpose.  For purposes 



 
			
of this section, an offense was committed before the effective date 



 
			
of this Act if any element of the offense occurred before that date.



 
			
       SECTION 5.  This Act takes effect immediately if it receives 



 
			
a vote of two-thirds of all the members elected to each house, as 



 
			
provided by Section 39, Article III, Texas Constitution.  If this 



 
			
Act does not receive the vote necessary for immediate effect, this 



 
			
Act takes effect September 1, 2023.








2023-2024 Bill 3565 Text of Previous Version (Dec. 15, 2022) - South Carolina Legislature Online
 

South Carolina General Assembly125th Session, 2023-2024Bill 3565Indicates Matter StrickenIndicates New Matter(Text matches printed bills. Document has been reformatted to meet World Wide Web specifications.)








A bill

to amend the South Carolina Code of Laws BY enactING the "State Pension Fiduciary Duty Act"; and by adding Section 9-16-110 so as to provide that state retirement funds must be invested solely to achieve a return for pension plan beneficiaries and not to achieve certain political and social objectives.

Be it enacted by the General Assembly of the State of South Carolina:

SECTION 1.This act may be cited as the "State Pension Fiduciary Duty Act".

SECTION 2.Article 1, Chapter 16, Title 9 of the S.C. Code is amended by adding:

Section 9-16-110.(A) As used in this section:
(1) "Fiduciary commitment" means any evidence of a fiduciary's purpose in managing assets as a fiduciary including, but not limited to, any of the following in a fiduciary's capacity as a fiduciary:
(a) advertising, statements, explanations, reports, letters to clients, communications with portfolio companies, statements of principles, or commitments; or
(b) participation in, affiliation with, or status as a signatory to, any coalition, initiative, joint statement of principles, or agreement.
(2) "Financial" means having been prudently determined by a fiduciary to have a material effect on the financial risk or the financial return of an investment.
(a) Financial does not include any action taken, or factor considered, by a fiduciary with any purpose whatsoever to further social, political, or ideological interests.
(b) A fiduciary may reasonably be determined to have taken an action, or considered a factor, with a purpose to further social, political, or ideological interests based upon evidence indicating such a purpose including, but not limited to, any fiduciary commitment to further, through portfolio company engagement, board or shareholder votes, or otherwise as a fiduciary, any of the following beyond what controlling federal or state law requires:
(i) eliminating, reducing, offsetting, or disclosing greenhouse gas emissions;
(ii) instituting or assessing corporate board or employment, composition, compensation, or disclosure criteria that incorporates characteristics protected in this State by law;
(iii) divesting from, limiting investment in, or limiting the activities or investments of, any company, for failing, or not committing, to meet environmental standards or disclosures; or
(iv) access to abortion, sex or gender change, or transgender surgery; or
(v) divesting from, limiting investment in, or limiting the activities or investments of, any company, for engaging in, facilitating, or supporting the manufacture, distribution, sale, or use of firearms.
(B)(1) In making and supervising investments of the reserve fund of a retirement system, the commission and any of its fiduciaries shall discharge its duties solely in the financial interest of the participants and beneficiaries for the exclusive purposes of:
(a) providing financial benefits to participants and their beneficiaries; and
(b) defraying reasonable expenses of administering the system.
(2) Any investment manager of any retirement system funds is subject to the same fiduciary duties as set forth in item (1) when investing such funds.
(3) A fiduciary shall take into account only financial factors when discharging its duties with respect to a plan and may not consider environmental, social, and governance (ESG) standards. 
(4) All shares held directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a retirement system or the participants and their beneficiaries must be voted solely in the financial interest of plan participants and their beneficiaries.
(5) Unless no economically practicable alternative is available, the commission may not grant proxy voting authority to any person who is not a part of the commission, unless that person has a practice of, and in writing commits to, follow guidelines that match the commission's obligation to act solely upon financial factors.
(6) Unless no economically practicable alternative is available, retirement system assets may not be entrusted to a fiduciary, unless that fiduciary has a practice of, and in writing commits to, follow guidelines, when engaging with portfolio companies and voting shares or proxies, that match the commission's obligation to act solely upon financial factors.
(7) Unless no economically practicable alternative is available, the commission or any of its fiduciaries may not adopt a practice of following the recommendations of a proxy advisor or other service provider, unless such advisor or service provider has a practice of, and in writing commits to, follow proxy voting guidelines that match the commission's obligation to act solely upon financial factors.
(8) All proxy votes must be tabulated and reported annually to the board. For each vote, the report must contain a vote caption, the plan's vote, the recommendation of company management, and, if applicable, the proxy advisor's recommendation. These reports must be posted on a publicly available webpage on the board's website.
(C)(1) This section, or any contract subject to this section, may be enforced by the Attorney General.
(2) If the Attorney General has reasonable cause to believe that a person has engaged in, is engaging in, or is about to engage in, a violation of this section, he may:
(a) require such person to file on such forms as he prescribes a statement or report in writing, under oath, as to all the facts and circumstances concerning the violation and such other data and information as he considers necessary;
(b) examine under oath any person in connection with the violation;
(c) examine any record, book, document, account, or paper as he considers necessary; and
(d) pursuant to an order of the circuit court, impound any record, book, document, account, paper, sample, or material relating to such practice and retain the same in his possession until the completion of all proceedings undertaken under this section or in the courts.

SECTION 3.This act takes effect upon approval by the Governor.
----XX----
This web page was last updated on December 15, 2022 at 03:16 PM


